David Chalmers
For other people with the same name, see David Chalmers (disambiguation).






This biographical article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this biographical article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





David Chalmers



Chalmers in 2008



Born
David John Chalmers
(1966-04-20) 20 April 1966 (age 51)
Sydney, Australia


Alma mater
University of Adelaide
Lincoln College, Oxford
Indiana University[1]





Era
Contemporary philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Analytic



Main interests

Philosophy of mind
Consciousness
Philosophy of language



Notable ideas

Hard problem of consciousness; Extended mind; Two-dimensional semantics; Biological dualism




Influences


Douglas Hofstadter, Daniel Dennett, René Descartes, Rudolf Carnap








Influenced


Gualtiero Piccinini, Sam Harris, Tyler Burge









David John Chalmers (/ˈtʃælmərz/;[2] born 20 April 1966) is an Australian philosopher and cognitive scientist specializing in the areas of philosophy of mind and philosophy of language. He is Professor of Philosophy and Director of the Centre for Consciousness at the Australian National University. He is also a University Professor, Professor of Philosophy and Neural Science, and a Director of the Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness (along with Ned Block) at New York University.[3][4] In 2013, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences.



Contents


1 Life
2 Thought

2.1 Philosophy of mind
2.2 Philosophy of language
2.3 Philosophy of verbal disputes


3 Bibliography
4 See also
5 Notes
6 External links



Life[edit]
Since 2004, Chalmers has been Professor of Philosophy, Director of the Centre for Consciousness, and an ARC Federation Fellow at the Australian National University.
Chalmers received his undergraduate degree in pure mathematics from the University of Adelaide in Australia and continued his studies at the University of Oxford, where he was a Rhodes Scholar.[5] Chalmers received his PhD in philosophy and cognitive science from Indiana University Bloomington under Douglas Hofstadter. He was a postdoctoral fellow in the Philosophy-Neuroscience-Psychology program directed by Andy Clark at Washington University in St. Louis from 1993 to 1995, and his first professorship was at UC Santa Cruz, from August 1995 to December 1998. Chalmers was subsequently appointed Professor of Philosophy (1999–2004) and, later, Director of the Center for Consciousness Studies (2002–2004) at the University of Arizona, sponsor of the Toward a Science of Consciousness[6] conference. After appearing as a plenary speaker at the first meeting, Chalmers has subsequently taken the role of co-organizer, alongside Stuart Hameroff, of this conference.
Chalmers' 1996 book, The Conscious Mind, was described by The Sunday Times as "one of the best science books of the year".[7] In the book, Chalmers argues that all forms of physicalism (whether reductive or non-reductive) that have dominated modern philosophy and science fail to account for the existence (that is, presence in reality) of consciousness itself. He proposes an alternative dualistic view he calls naturalistic dualism (but which might also be characterized by more traditional formulations such as property dualism, neutral monism, or double-aspect theory).
He is the lead singer of the Zombie Blues band which performed at the Qualia Fest in 2012[8] in New York. Chalmers is an editor on topics in the philosophy of mind for the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.[9]
On 14 June 2016 David Chalmers visited Moscow to hold a lecture at Moscow State University focused on solving the Hard problem of consciousness.[10] He also gave an interview about it before holding a lecture at the Moscow State University.[11]
Thought[edit]
Philosophy of mind[edit]




Chalmers on stage for an Alan Turing Year event at De La Salle University, Manila, March 27, 2012


Chalmers is best known for his formulation of the notion of a hard problem of consciousness in both his 1996 book and in the 1995 paper "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness". He makes a distinction between "easy" problems of consciousness, such as explaining object discrimination or verbal reports, and the single hard problem, which could be stated "why does the feeling which accompanies awareness of sensory information exist at all?" The essential difference between the (cognitive) easy problems and the (phenomenal) hard problem is that the former are at least theoretically answerable via the standard strategy in philosophy of mind: functionalism. Chalmers argues for an "explanatory gap" from the objective to the subjective, and criticizes physical explanations of mental experience, making him a dualist. Chalmers characterizes his view as "naturalistic dualism": naturalistic because he believes mental states are caused by physical systems (such as brains); dualist because he believes mental states are ontologically distinct from and not reducible to physical systems.
In support of this, Chalmers is famous for his commitment to the logical (though, importantly, not natural) possibility of philosophical zombies.[12] These zombies, unlike the zombie of popular fiction, are complete physical duplicates of human beings, lacking only qualitative experience. Chalmers argues that since such zombies are conceivable to us, they must therefore be logically possible. Since they are logically possible, then qualia and sentience are not fully explained by physical properties alone. Instead, Chalmers argues that consciousness is a fundamental property ontologically autonomous of any known (or even possible) physical properties[citation needed], and that there may be lawlike rules which he terms "psychophysical laws" that determine which physical systems are associated with which types of qualia. He further speculates that all information-bearing systems may be conscious, leading him to entertain the possibility of conscious thermostats and a qualified panpsychism he calls panprotopsychism. Chalmers maintains a formal agnosticism on the issue, even conceding that the viability of panpsychism places him at odds with the majority of his contemporaries. According to Chalmers, his arguments are similar to a line of thought that goes back to Leibniz's 1714 "mill" argument; the first substantial use of philosophical "zombie" terminology may be Robert Kirk's 1974 "Zombies vs. Materialists".[13]
After the publication of Chalmers's landmark paper, more than twenty papers in response were published in the Journal of Consciousness Studies. These papers (by Daniel Dennett, Colin McGinn, Francisco Varela, Francis Crick, and Roger Penrose, among others) were collected and published in the book Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem. John Searle critiqued Chalmers's views in The New York Review of Books.[14]
With Andy Clark, Chalmers has written The Extended Mind, an article about the borders of the mind.[15]
Philosophy of language[edit]
Chalmers has published works on the "theory of reference" concerning how words secure their referents. He, together with others such as Frank Jackson, proposes a kind of theory called two dimensionalism arguing against Saul Kripke. Before Kripke delivered the famous lecture series Naming and Necessity in 1970, the descriptivism advocated by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell was the orthodoxy. Descriptivism suggests that a name is indeed an abbreviation of a description, which is a set of properties or, as later modified by John Searle, a disjunction of properties. This name secures its reference by a process of properties fitting: whichever object fits the description most, then it is the referent of the name. Therefore, the description is seen as the connotation, or, in Fregean terms, the sense of the name, and it is via this sense by which the denotation of the name is determined.
However, as Kripke argued in Naming and Necessity, a name does not secure its reference via any process of description fitting. Rather, a name determines its reference via a historical-causal link tracing back to the process of naming. And thus, Kripke thinks that a name does not have a sense, or, at least, does not have a sense which is rich enough to play the reference-determining role. Moreover, a name, in Kripke's view, is a rigid designator, which refers to the same object in all possible worlds. Following this line of thought, Kripke suggests that any scientific identity statement such as "Water is H2O" is also a necessary statement, i.e. true in all possible worlds. Kripke thinks that this is a phenomenon that the descriptivist cannot explain.
And, as also proposed by Hilary Putnam and Kripke himself, Kripke's view on names can also be applied to the reference of natural kind terms. The kind of theory of reference that is advocated by Kripke and Putnam is called the direct reference theory.
However, Chalmers disagrees with Kripke, and all the direct reference theorists in general. He thinks that there are two kinds of intension of a natural kind term, a stance which is now called two dimensionalism. For example, the words,

"Water is H2O"

are taken to express two distinct propositions, often referred to as a primary intension and a secondary intension, which together compose its meaning.[16]
The primary intension of a word or sentence is its sense, i.e., is the idea or method by which we find its referent. The primary intension of "water" might be a description, such as watery stuff. The thing picked out by the primary intension of "water" could have been otherwise. For example, on some other world where the inhabitants take "water" to mean watery stuff, but where the chemical make-up of watery stuff is not H2O, it is not the case that water is H2O for that world.
The secondary intension of "water" is whatever thing "water" happens to pick out in this world, whatever that world happens to be. So if we assign "water" the primary intension watery stuff then the secondary intension of "water" is H2O, since H2O is watery stuff in this world. The secondary intension of "water" in our world is H2O, and is H2O in every world because unlike watery stuff it is impossible for H2O to be other than H2O. When considered according to its secondary intension, water means H2O in every world. Via this secondary intension, Chalmers proposes a way simultaneously to explain the necessity of the identity statement and to preserve the role of intension/sense in determining the reference.
Philosophy of verbal disputes[edit]
In recent work, Chalmers has concentrated on verbal disputes.[17] He argues that a dispute is best characterized as "verbal" when it concerns some sentence S which contains a term T such that (i) the parties to the dispute disagree over the meaning of T, and (ii) the dispute arises solely because of this disagreement. In the same work, Chalmers proposes certain procedures for the resolution of verbal disputes. One of these he calls the "elimination method", which involves eliminating the contentious term and observing whether any dispute remains.
Bibliography[edit]

The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory (1996). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 0-19-511789-1, paperback: ISBN 0-19-510553-2
Toward a Science of Consciousness III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates (1999). Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak and David J. Chalmers (Editors). The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-58181-7
Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings (2002). (Editor). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514581-X or ISBN 0-19-514580-1
The Character of Consciousness (2010). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 0-19-531110-8, paperback: ISBN 0-19-531111-6
Constructing The World (2012). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 978-0-19-960857-7, paperback: ISBN 978-0199608584
"Why Isn’t There More Progress in Philosophy?"

See also[edit]

PhilPapers

Notes[edit]



^ CV
^ "The Thinking Ape: The Enigma of Human Consciousness"
^ philosophy.fas.nyu.edu
^ "People – NYU Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness". wp.nyu.edu. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ Cognitive Science Online
^ consciousness.arizona.edu
^ The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory (1996), paperback edition, back cover.
^ NYTimes.com
^ "Editorial Board (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)". plato.stanford.edu. Retrieved 10 December 2016. 
^ The hard problem of consciousness: 300 years on. Lecture at the MSU
^ Consciousness and the Universe. Interview with David Chalmers
^ Burkeman, Oliver (21 January 2015). "Why can't the world's greatest minds solve the mystery of consciousness?". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 January 2017. 
^ David Chalmers. "Zombies on the web". consc.net. Retrieved 7 January 2017. As far as I know, the first paper in the philosophical literature to talk at length about zombies under that name was Robert Kirk's "Zombies vs. Materialists" in Mind in 1974, although Keith Campbell's 1970 book Body and Mind talks about an "imitation-man" which is much the same thing, and the idea arguably goes back to Leibniz's "mill" argument. 
^ Searle's review of The Conscious Mind 6 March 1997 (subscription required)
Chalmers' response to Searle and Searle's reply 15 May 1997 (free access)
^ consc.net Analysis 58:10-23, 1998. Reprinted in The Philosopher's Annual, 1998.
^ for a fuller explanation see Chalmers, David. The Conscious Mind. Oxford UP: 1996. Chapter 2, section 4.
^ consc.net Philosophical Review, 120:4, 2011.



External links[edit]

Find more aboutDavid Chalmersat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata



Official website
An in-depth autobiographical interview with David Chalmers
"The Singularity" a documentary film featuring Chalmers
The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with David Chalmers
David Chalmers at TED 







v
t
e


Analytic philosophy



Philosophers



J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Nick Bostrom
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Patricia Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
James F. Conant
Alice Crary
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Cora Diamond
Michael Dummett
Paul Feyerabend
Antony Flew
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
Paul Grice
Ian Hacking
R. M. Hare
Carl Gustav Hempel
Peter van Inwagen
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
Thomas Kuhn
David Lewis
Alasdair MacIntyre
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Ernest Nagel
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
Alvin Plantinga
Karl Popper
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Richard Rorty
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Moritz Schlick
John Searle
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Richard Swinburne
Charles Taylor
Michael Walzer
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein





Theories



Actualism
Analytical feminism
Analytical Marxism
Anti-realism
Berlin Circle
Descriptivist theory of names
Emotivism
Functional contextualism
Linguistic turn
Logical positivism
Modal realism
Model-dependent realism
Neopragmatism
Neurophilosophy
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Pragmatic theory of truth
Verificationism
Vienna Circle





Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal / Deductive / epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation / reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning (Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind / projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid–flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction





Related articles



Aretaic turn
Australian realism
Communitarianism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy








 Index
 Category












v
t
e


Philosophy of mind



Theories



Behaviorism (Radical)
Biological naturalism
Cognitive psychology
Mind–body dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Emergentism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism

Neurophenomenology


Neutral monism
Occasionalism
Psychoanalysis
Parallelism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology
Physicalism

identity theory


Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Substance dualism





Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem

Non-physical entity


New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...





Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self








Portal
Category
Philosophers category
Project
Task Force












v
t
e


Consciousness



Figures



Antonio Damasio
Benjamin Libet
Bernard Baars
Christof Koch
Colin McGinn
Daniel Dennett
David Bohm
David Chalmers
David Pearce
Douglas Hofstadter
Eugene Wigner
Francis Crick
Frank Jackson
George Berkeley
Georges Rey
Gerald Edelman
Giulio Tononi
John Eccles
John Locke
John Searle
Joseph Levine
Karl Popper
Karl Pribram
Max Velmans
Michael Gazzaniga
Michael Graziano
Ned Block
Patricia Churchland
Patrick Wilken
Paul Churchland
René Descartes
Roger Penrose
Stanislas Dehaene
Steven Novella
Stuart Hameroff
Susan Blackmore
Thomas Nagel
Victor J. Stenger
William James
William Lycan





Theories



Attention schema theory
Global workspace theory
Holonomic brain theory
Integrated information theory
Multiple drafts model





Topics



Altered state of consciousness
Animal consciousness
Artificial consciousness
Attention
Awareness
Binding problem
Brain
Cartesian theater
Collective consciousness
Consciousness after death
Disorders of consciousness
Double-aspect theory
Dual consciousness
Electromagnetic theories of consciousness
Eliminative materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Experience
Explanatory gap
Free will
Functionalism (philosophy of mind)
Hard problem of consciousness
Heterophenomenology
Higher consciousness
Idealism
Interactionism
Introspection illusion
Knowledge argument
Level of consciousness
Materialism
Metaphysics
Mind
Mind–body dualism
Mind–body problem
Monism
Neural correlates of consciousness
Neurophenomenology
Neutral monism
New mysterianism
Ontology
Panpsychism
Parallelism
Phenomenology
Philosophical zombie
Philosophy of mind
Physicalism
Primary consciousness
Problem of other minds
Property dualism
Reentry
Reflexive monism
Revisionary materialism
Qualia
Quantum mind
Secondary consciousness
Sentience
Sociology of human consciousness
Solipsism
Stream of consciousness
Subjective character of experience
Subjective consciousness
Subjectivity
Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory of mind)
Unconscious mind
Unconsciousness





Works



Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness
Consciousness and Cognition
Consciousness Explained
How the Self Controls Its Brain
Journal of Consciousness Studies
Online Consciousness Conference
Psyche
The Astonishing Hypothesis
The Conscious Mind
The Emperor's New Mind
Toward a Science of Consciousness
Understanding Consciousness
What Is it Like to Be a Bat?









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 84833711
LCCN: no93033565
ISNI: 0000 0001 1074 3535
GND: 129879630
SUDOC: 034632107
BNF: cb12536782g (data)
NDL: 00863518










Categories: 20th-century philosophers21st-century philosophers1966 birthsAnalytic philosophersAustralian philosophersAustralian academicsAustralian National University facultyAustralian Rhodes ScholarsConsciousness researchers and theoristsCognitive scientistsLiving peoplePhilosophers of mindQuantum mindAlumni of Lincoln College, OxfordUniversity of Adelaide alumniIndiana University alumniInternational Mathematical Olympiad participantsPhilosophers of languageAustralian atheistsHidden categories: Use Australian English from September 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishUse dmy dates from June 2013Articles lacking reliable references from March 2013All articles lacking reliable referencesBLP articles lacking sources from March 2013Articles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers