Joxe Azurmendi


Joxe Azurmendi



Joxe Azurmendi on the 50th anniversary of the magazine Jakin (2006)



Born
(1941-03-19) 19 March 1941 (age 77)
Zegama, Basque Country, Spain


Alma mater
University of the Basque Country





Era
Contemporary philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Continental Philosophy



Main interests

Modernity, Age of Enlightenment, Romanticism, Social philosophy, Political philosophy, Philosophical anthropology, Philosophy of language, ethics, nationalism, Basque literature



Notable ideas

Relative relativism, open nature of human being, the State as secular church, morality as political weapon




Influences


Isaiah Berlin, Kant, Wilhelm von Humboldt, Nietzsche, Miguel de Unamuno









Joxe Azurmendi Otaegi (born 19 March 1941) is a Basque writer, philosopher, essayist and poet. He has published numerous articles and books on ethics, politics, the philosophy of language, technique, Basque literature and philosophy in general.[1]
He is member of Jakin and the director of Jakin irakurgaiak, a publishing house which has published over 40 books under his management. He also collaborated with the Klasikoak[2] publishing firm in the Basque translations of various philosophical works and was one of the founders of Udako Euskal Unibertsitatea (The Basque Summer University).[3] He is currently a Professor of Modern Philosophy and a lecturer at Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea (The University of the Basque Country).[4] In 2010 he was awarded the title "honorary academic" by Euskaltzaindia (The Basque Language Academy).[5]
Azurmendi is an intellectual who studies the problem more than the solution. Azurmendi's essays cover modern European topics in great depth and knowledge. He has incorporated the philosophy and thinking of European thinkers, especially German ones. He often adopts a polemic tone.[6]
Joxe Azurmendi is, in the opinion of many, one of the most prolific and erudite thinkers in the Basque Country.[7][8]



Contents


1 Life
2 Thinking
3 Writing style
4 Awards and recognition
5 Works

5.1 Essays
5.2 Poetry
5.3 Articles in journals


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Life[edit]
Joxe Azurmendi studied philosophy and theology at The University of the Basque Country, Rome and Münster.[9]
At the beginning of the 1960s he joined the cultural movement which grew up around the magazine Jakin, and was in fact the director of the publication when it was prohibited for the first time by Franco's regime. He has collaborated closely and uninterruptedly with the magazine since its restoration. In that publication he has raised the problems of Basque society in the context of European thinkers.[10] During the early 1970s he focused his attention on disseminating basic literature in the Basque language on subjects which were being hotly debated at the time in the Basque Country: nationhood, socialism, internationalism,[11] etc. In the 1980s he began teaching at The University of the Basque Country, and in 1984 he submitted his thesis on Jose Maria Arizmendiarrieta, the founder of the Mondragon cooperative movement, in which he argued that Arizmendiarrieta's project aimed to unite individuals and society under an organisation which combined both socialism and French personalism.[12]
In 1992 he published what was to become his best-known work: Espainolak eta euskaldunak (The Spanish and the Basques). The work, published by Elkar, was written in response to a text by Sánchez-Albornoz which claimed that "The Basques are the last people to be civilised in Spain; they have a thousand years less civilisation than any other people ... They are rough, simple people who nevertheless consider themselves to be the children of God and the heirs to his glory. But they are really nothing more than un-Romanised Spaniards."[13] Azurmendi's essay refuted and dismantled the stereotypes maintained about the Basques by certain Spanish intellectuals.
It was on the threshold of the new millennium, however, that Azurmendi's work reached its height. During the early years of the 21st century he published the trilogy formed by Espainiaren arimaz (About the soul of Spain) (2006, Elkar), Humboldt. Hizkuntza eta pentsamendua (Humboldt. Language and Thought) (2007, UEU) and Volksgeist. Herri gogoa (Volksgeist. National Character) (2008, Elkar). In this trilogy, Joxe Azurmendi reveals some of his most significant thinking.
Thinking[edit]
His work emerged and developed during a period marked by a crisis of culture, politics and values. But it was a crisis that he understood not as something negative, but rather something that opened up a whole new range of possibilities. Consequently, all his thinking is centred around the defence of freedom in every field, but especially in relation to conscience and thinking.
Far from fleeing the crisis, then, his work tries to outline how we can live in this situation. To this end, he adopts a relativist perspective, and given that modernity has left us with no solid base, he fights against the last vestiges of the dogmatism towards which our society tends to lean when in crisis:

" The proclamation of relativism is provocative. ... I am not particularly interested in being an apostle of relativism. But as I come from a dogmatic culture [Franco's regime], I'm allergic to some things. Truth, Reason and absolute correction were Catholic in that culture. Now I hear that postmodern relativism is the cause of the moral misery and the loss of values. It is seen that there is a nostalgia of dogmatic culture, disguised with some democratic and enlightened discourse. That dogmatic culture has relativism as its enemy, for that reason I claim this convicted relativism. But it is not an absolute relativism."[14]

In this sense, for example, he is critical of the modern state, which he accuses of being the new church seeking to control our consciences.[15] He also criticises the exploitation of morality, or in other words, how politicians, instead of solving the problems facing them in their various areas or fields, flee instead to moral ground in order to hide their responsibilities under the cloak of supposedly absolute moral principles:

"In the mean time, what is the point of repeating the old tale as to what the state is becoming? Once the sour critical analysis of sometime ago (Herbert Marcuse: One-Dimensional Man), the dark negative utopias (Aldous Huxley, George Orwell) and the protest cries (May 68) are forgotten, and with a near lack of the slightest sense of resistance in civil society, the cobweb of power spins peacefully over our heads, all over the place. Even the dressing room."[16]

He has also made an important contribution in questioning the canonical interpretations which have been constructed regarding different issues. Of particular interest, due to his erudition and training in Germany, is his interpretation of the German Enlightenment. In this context he deconstructs the apparent opposition between the French Enlightenment and German Romanticism and proposes a new way of thinking about the different aspects which stem from this opposition.[17] In this way, he defies certain Spanish and French intellectuals (Alain Finkielkraut[18]) and argues that nationalism in fact arose in France (Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, Ernest Renan) and was later reinterpreted by the German thinkers and romantics. By doing this, he questions the way in which authors such as Goethe, Schiller, Herder or Humboldt are viewed as the fathers of metaphysical nationalism. In this field, the opposition between civic nationalism and ethnic nationalism is deconstructed.[19] Thus, Azurmendi criticizes the essentialist basis of Spanish nationalism[20] and French nationalism[21] that operates under these nation states.
Some of the topics Azurmendi deeply develops in his essays first appeared in his poetry of youth. Azurmendi is within the Basque poetry of the 60s which shows the fight against the tradition, the old faith and the dogmatic certainties:[22]

But we wish to be free
is that my fault?
They tried to give us a tree from Gernika,
a false blank check,
as if the desire to be free were a sin,
but despite that, we, quite simply, wish to be free.
That is what we want, that is all.
This is the latest deception:
they have led us to believe
before from outside and now from within
that it is our responsibility to justify our wish to be free.

Manifestu atzeratua (Belated Manifesto) (1968)

He also dedicates a large part of his work to recovering and reinterpreting Basque thinkers, breaking through and dismantling numerous stereotypes. Of particular interest is his research into Jon Mirande, Orixe, Unamuno[23][24][25] and others. He is an author who has worked from within and for Basque culture. He claims to have been influenced by Basque authors[26] from the post-war period, for example, in questions of language. In this field, he has researched other authors also, including Heidegger, Wittgenstein, George Steiner and Humboldt. The fact that his vast oeuvre is all written in the Basque language is clearly consistent with his thinking.
Writing style[edit]
In his language Joxe Azurmendi combines an educated register with colloquial expressions, and his prose is fast, incisive, and ironic. Azurmendi's Basque is modern and standard and he demonstrates great knowledge of the language, and richness and variety of expression.[27]
Awards and recognition[edit]

1976: Andima Ibiñagabeitia Award for the work: Espainolak eta euskaldunak[28]
1978: Irun Hiria Award for the work: Mirande eta kristautasuna (Mirande and Christianity).
1998: Irun Hiria Award for the work: Teknikaren meditazioa (Meditations on Technique).
2005: Juan San Martin Award for the work: Humboldt: Hizkuntza eta pentsamendua (Humboldt. Language and Thought).[29]
2010: Euskadi Literatura Saria Award, in the essay category, for the work: Azken egunak Gandiagarekin (The last days with Gandiaga).[30]
2010: Ohorezko euskaltzaina by Euskaltzaindia.[31]
2012: Eusko Ikaskuntza Award.[32][33]
2012: Dabilen Elea Award[34]
2014: Digitization of the entire work of Joxe Azurmendi by The Council of Gipuzkoa[35]
2015: Euskadi Literatura Saria Award, in the essay category, for the work: Historia, arraza, nazioa (History, race, nation).[36]

Works[edit]
The Inguma[37] database of the Basque scientific community contains over 180 texts written by Azurmendi.
Essays[edit]

Hizkuntza, etnia eta marxismoa (Language, Ethnics and Marxism) (1971, Euskal Elkargoa)
Kolakowski (Kołakowski) (1972, EFA): co-author: Joseba Arregui
Kultura proletarioaz (About Proletarian Culture) (1973, Jakin EFA)
Iraultza sobietarra eta literatura (The Soviet Revolution and Literature) (1975, Gero Mensajero)
Gizona Abere hutsa da (Man is Pure Animal) (1975, EFA)
Zer dugu Orixeren kontra? (What do we have against Orixe?) (1976, EFA Jakin)
Zer dugu Orixeren alde? (What do we have in favour of Orixe?) (1977, EFA Jakin)
Artea eta gizartea (Art and Society) (1978, Haranburu)
Errealismo sozialistaz (About Socialist Realism) (1978, Haranburu)
Mirande eta kristautasuna (Mirande and Christianity) (1978, GAK)
Arana Goiriren pentsamendu politikoa (The political thinking of Arana Goiri) (1979, Hordago Lur)
Nazionalismo Internazionalismo Euskadin (Nationalism Internationalism in the Basque Country) (1979, Hordago Lur)
PSOE eta euskal abertzaletasuna (The Spanish Socialist Party and Basque Nationalism) (1979, Hordago Lur)
El hombre cooperativo. Pensamiento de Arizmendiarrieta (Cooperative Man. Arizmendiarrieta's thinking) (1984, Lan Kide Aurrezkia)

Translated into Japanese as ホセ・アスルメンディ: アリスメンディアリエタの協同組合哲学 ( 東大和 : みんけん出版 , 1990) ISBN 4-905845-73-4


Filosofía personalista y cooperación. Filosofía de Arizmendiarrieta (Personalist philosophy and cooperation. Arizmendiarrieta's philosophy) (1984, EHU)
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Spengler, Miranderen pentsamenduan (Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Spengler in the thinking of Mirande) (1989, Susa)
Miranderen pentsamendua (Mirande's thinking) (1989, Susa)
Gizaberearen bakeak eta gerrak (War and Peace according to the Human Animal) (1991, Elkar)
Espainolak eta euskaldunak (The Spanish and the Basques) (1992, Elkar)

Translated into Spanish as Azurmendi, Joxe: Los españoles y los euskaldunes, Hondarribia: Hiru, 1995. ISBN 978-84-87524-83-7


Karlos Santamaria. Ideiak eta ekintzak (Karlos Santamaria. Ideas and Action) (1994, The Gipuzkoa Provincial Council (unpublished))
La idea cooperativa: del servicio a la comunidad a su nueva creación (The cooperative idea: from the community service toward its new creation) (1996, Gizabidea Fundazioa)
Demokratak eta biolentoak (The Democrats and the Violent) (1997, Elkar)
Teknikaren meditazioa (Meditations on Technique) (1998, Kutxa Fundazioa)
Oraingo gazte eroak (The Mad Youth of Today) (1998, Enbolike)
El hecho catalán. El hecho portugués (The Catalan fact. The Portuguese fact) (1999, Hiru)
Euskal Herria krisian (The Basque Country in Crisis) (1999, Elkar)
La violencia y la búsqueda de nuevos valores (The violence and the search for new values) (2001, Hiru)
La presencia de Nietzsche en los pensadores vascos Ramiro de Maeztu y Jon Mirande (The Nietzsche's presence in the Basque thinkers Ramiro de Maeztu and Jon Mirande) (2002, Euskalerriaren Adiskideen Elkartea)
Etienne Salaberry. Bere pentsamenduaz (1903-2003) (Etienne Salaberry. About his Thinking (1903-2003)) (2003, Egan)
Espainiaren arimaz (About the soul of Spain) (2006, Elkar)
Volksgeist. Herri gogoa (Volksgeist. National Character) (2007, Elkar)
Humboldt. Hizkuntza eta pentsamendua (Humboldt. Language and Thought) (2007, UEU)
Azken egunak Gandiagarekin (The last days with Gandiaga) (2009, Elkar)
Bakea gudan (Peace in War) (2012, Txalaparta)
Barkamena, kondena, tortura (Forgiveness, Condemnation, Torture) (2012, Elkar)
Karlos Santamariaren pentsamendua (Karlos Santamaria's thinking) (2013, Jakin/EHU)
Historia, arraza, nazioa (History, race, nation) (2014, Elkar)
Gizabere kooperatiboaz (About the cooperative Human Animal) (2016, Jakin)
Hizkuntza, Nazioa, Estatua (Language, Nation, State) (2017, Elkar)
Beltzak, juduak eta beste euskaldun batzuk (Blacks, Jews and other Basques) (2018, Elkar)

Poetry[edit]

Hitz berdeak (Unrefined words) (1971, EFA)
XX. mendeko poesia kaierak - Joxe Azurmendi (Books of 20th century poetry - Joxe Azurmendi) (2000, Susa), edition of Koldo Izagirre.

Articles in journals[edit]

Articles in the journal Jakin[38]
Articles in the journal Anaitasuna[39]
Articles in the journal RIEV[40]

See also[edit]

Volksgeist

Notes[edit]


^ "Azurmendi, Joxe" Archived 23 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.. Harluxet Hiztegi Entziklopedikoa (Encyclopedia Online in Basque)(Retrieved 29 October 2013)
^ Klasikoak, Collection of translations into the Basque language of the classics of universal thought (website of EHU)
^ Andoni Olariaga: "Joxe Azurmendi. Askatasunaren pentsalaria" in Alaitz Aizpuru, Eukal Herriko pentsamenduaren gida, Bilbo: UEU, 2012. p. 147
^ Joxe Azurmendi at The University of the Basque Country (EHU)
^ Joxe Azurmendi at The Basque Language Academy
^ Altzibar, Xabier. "The Essay in Basque" in Mari Jose Olaziregi (ed.), Basque Literary History, Reno, Center for Basque Studies/University of Nevada, pp. 283–84
^ Altzibar, Xabier. "The Essay in Basque" in Mari Jose Olaziregi (ed.), Basque Literary History, Reno: Center for Basque Studies/University of Nevada, 2012
^ Iturriotz, Ander (2010). "Zergatik Azurmendi?", Hegats, 45: 9-15.
^ Preface of Gandiaga in Joxe Azurmendi: Hitz berdeak, Oñati: EFA, 1971
^ Sudupe, Pako: 50eko hamarkadako euskal literatura II, Donostia: Utriusque Vasconiae, 2011. p. 283.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Arana Goiri-ren pentsamendu politikoa, Donostia: Hordago Lur, 1979. p. 1.
^ Andoni Olariaga: "Joxe Azurmendi. Askatasunaren pentsalaria" in Alaitz Aizpuru, Euskal Herriko pentsamenduaren gida, Bilbo: UEU, 2012. p. 149
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Espainolak eta euskaldunak, Donostia: Elkar, 1992. p. 17.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: "The Basques are Argonauts with very fragile ships", Interview in Hegats (45), p. 209.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Barkamena, kondena, tortura, Donostia: Elkar, 2012.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Demokratak eta biolentoak,Donostia: Elkar, 1997. p. 101.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Volksgeist. Herri gogoa, Donostia: Elkar, 2008. p. 129.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Euskal Herria krisian, Donostia: Elkar, 1999. p.119
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Historia, arraza, nazioa, Donostia: Elkar, 2014. p. 27.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Espainiaren arimaz, Donostia: Elkar, 2006
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Historia, arraza, nazioa, Donostia: Elkar, 2014
^ Estankona, I. 2010: "Artean gazte eta berde: Azurmendiren Hitz berdeak eta Manifestu atzeratua", Hegats, 45: 71-83
^ Joxe Azurmendi: "Unamunoren atarian" in Euskal Herriko pentsamenduaren gida, Bilbo: UEU, 2012. p. 29.
^ Joxe Azurmendi: Bakea Gudan. Unamuno, historia eta karlismoa, Tafalla: Txalaparta, 2012. Azurmendi delves into the thinking of Unamuno, under the pretext of the novel Paz en la guerra by Unamuno, which deals with the last Carlist War and especially with the site of Bilbo. It therefore turned out in an interpretive essay on the conflict Carlism vs. liberalism, or in other words, in an interpretive essay on Basque Country and Modernity. According to Azurmendi Unamuno analyzed and rejected the Basque problem from a 19th-century point of view
^ Interview on Unamuno: «Unamuno ez da inoiz liberala izan; antiliberala zen azken fasean ere», Berria, 31 May 2012 (Retrieved 29 October 2013)
^ Joxe Azurmendi: "Kierkegaard-en 'egunkari ezkutua'", in J.L. Ormaetxea, Txillardegi lagun giroan, Bilbo: UEU, 2000
^ Altzibar, Xabier 2012. "The Essay in Basque", in Mari Jose Olaziregi, Basque Literary History, Reno: Center for Basque Studies/University of Nevada. p. 284
^ Anaitasuna, 328.
^ website of UEU Archived 26 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ website of Basque Government.
^ Joxe Azurmendi at The Basque Language Academy
^ website of Eusko Ikaskuntza
^ report of Amaia Ereñaga, Gara, 9 November 2012 (Retrieved 29 October 2013)
^ website of Basque Language Publishers Association
^ website of The Council of Gipuzkoa Archived 19 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ The jury noted that the work allows us to rethink Europe. Website of Basque Government
^ Joxe Azurmendi
^ Jakingunea
^ Anaitasuna on the website of Euskaltzaindia.
^ RIEV 48. Archived 2 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.


References[edit]

Aizpuru, A. (coord.) 2012: Euskal Herriko pentsamenduaren gida, Bilbo: UEU ISBN 978-84-8438-435-9
Aizpuru, A. 2013: Suak erreko ez balu (I), hAUSnART, 3:102-121.
Altzibar, X. 2011: "XX. mendeko euskal literatura: saiakera" in Mari Jose Olaziregi, Euskal literaturaren historia, Donostia: EIZEI ISBN 978-84-615-0546-3. English edition: Olaziregi, Mari Jose (2012). Basque Literary History, Reno: Center for Basque Studies/University of Nevada ISBN 978-1-935709-19-0 (pbk.)
Arrieta, A. 2013: "Eranskina: Joxe Azurmendiren Azken egunak Gandiagarekin" in Arimak eta balioak, Donostia: Jakin. ISBN 978-84-95234-48-3
del Olmo, K. 2013: "Joxe Azurmendi: Espainolak eta euskaldunak (1992)" in Egungo euskal saiakeraren historia, Bilbo: EHU. ISBN 978-84-9860-829-8
Hegats. Literatur aldizkaria (45). ISSN 1130-2445
Sudupe, P. 2011: 50eko Hamarkadako Euskal Literatura II, Donostia: Utriusque Vasconiae ISBN 978-84-938329-5-7

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Joxe Azurmendi



(in English) The democrats and the violent
(in German) Verspätetes Manifest
(in German) Ein Denkmal der Achtung und Liebe. Humboldt über die baskische Landschaft, RIEV, 48-1: 125-142, Eusko Ikaskuntza, 2003 ISSN 0212-7016
(in Basque) Joxe Azurmendi on the jakingunea website
(in Basque) section on Joxe Azurmendi on the Literaturaren Zubitegia website
(in Basque) The poem Prometeo mixerablea, music by Imanol Ubeda.
(in Basque) interview by Elkarri.
(in Basque) Karlos Santamaria's thinking.
(in Basque) Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Spengler, in the thinking of Mirande (1989, Susa)
(in Basque) Books of 20th century poetry - Joxe Azurmendi (2000, Susa)
(in Basque) Joxe Azurmendi on the Lapiko Kritikoa website.







v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Pre-modern
philosophers



Aquinas
Aristotle
Averroes
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Al-Ghazali
Han Fei
Laozi
Marsilius
Mencius
Mozi
Muhammad
Plato
Shang
Socrates
Sun Tzu
Thucydides





Modern
philosophers



Bakunin
Bentham
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Comte
Emerson
Engels
Fourier
Franklin
Grotius
Hegel
Hobbes
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marx
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Nietzsche
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire





20th–21th-century
Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Azurmendi
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Judith Butler
Camus
Chomsky
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Foucault
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Irigaray
Kirk
Kropotkin
Lenin
Luxemburg
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Michels
Mises
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Simonović
Skinner
Sombart
Spann
Spirito
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force












v
t
e


Philosophy of language



Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick





Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory





Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...





Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics








Category
Task Force
Discussion












v
t
e


Ethics



Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics





Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Free will
Good and evil
Happiness
Ideal
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...





Philosophers



Laozi
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...





Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Engineering ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology





Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Population ethics
Social philosophy








Portal
Category












v
t
e


Continental philosophy



Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Giorgio Agamben
Louis Althusser
Hannah Arendt
Gaston Bachelard
Alain Badiou
Roland Barthes
Georges Bataille
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Walter Benjamin
Simone de Beauvoir
Henri Bergson
Maurice Blanchot
Pierre Bourdieu
Wendy Brown
Martin Buber
Judith Butler
Albert Camus
Ernst Cassirer
Cornelius Castoriadis
Emil Cioran
Guy Debord
Gilles Deleuze
Jacques Derrida
Wilhelm Dilthey
Hubert L. Dreyfus
Umberto Eco
Terry Eagleton
Friedrich Engels
Frantz Fanon
Johann Gottlieb Fichte
Michel Foucault
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Félix Guattari
Antonio Gramsci
Jürgen Habermas
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Roman Ingarden
Luce Irigaray
Fredric Jameson
Karl Jaspers
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Pierre Klossowski
Alexandre Kojève
Alexandre Koyré
Leszek Kołakowski
Julia Kristeva
Jacques Lacan
François Laruelle
Henri Lefebvre
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Emmanuel Levinas
Niklas Luhmann
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Gabriel Marcel
Herbert Marcuse
Karl Marx
Quentin Meillassoux
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Antonio Negri
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Paul Ricœur
Edward Said
Jean-Paul Sartre
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
Carl Schmitt
Arthur Schopenhauer
Michel Serres
Gilbert Simondon
Peter Sloterdijk
Leo Strauss
Raymond Williams
Slavoj Žižek





Theories



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Frankfurt School
German idealism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Kantianism
Non-philosophy
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Social constructionism
Speculative realism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Concepts



Angst
Authenticity
Being in itself
Boredom
Dasein
Différance
Difference
Existential crisis
Facticity
Intersubjectivity
Ontic
Other
Self-deception
Trace








Category
Index












v
t
e


Criticism of religion



By religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Christianity

Catholic

Opus Dei


Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Protestantism
Seventh-day Adventist
Unification Church
Westboro Baptist Church


Hinduism
Islam

Islamism
Twelver Shia Islam
Wahhabism


Jainism
Judaism
Monotheism
New religious movement
Scientology
Sikhism
Yazdânism
Zoroastrianism





Religious texts



Bible
Quran
Hadiths
Mormon sacred texts

Book of Mormon


Talmud





Religious figures



Aisha
Charles Taze Russell
Ellen White
Jesus
Moses
Muhammad
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
Saul





Religious violence



Buddhism
Christianity

Mormonism


Judaism
Islam
Terrorism

Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish


Persecution

Christian thought on persecution and tolerance


War

In Islam
In Judaism


Sectarian violence
By country

India

Anti-Christian violence
In Odisha


Nigeria
Pakistan







Books



Atheist Manifesto
Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon
Christianity Unveiled
God in the Age of Science?
God Is Not Great
God: The Failed Hypothesis
Letter to a Christian Nation
The Age of Reason
The Blind Watchmaker
The Caged Virgin
The End of Faith
The God Delusion
The Rage Against God
Why I Am Not a Christian
Why I Am Not a Muslim





Movements



Agnosticism
Antitheism
Atheism
Criticism of atheism
Cārvāka
New Atheism
Nontheistic religions
Parody religion









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 111111475
LCCN: n50058090
ISNI: 0000 0001 2147 8124
GND: 1041910134
SUDOC: 059635061
NDL: 00462586
BNE: XX881548










Categories: Basque writersBasque philosophers20th-century philosophers21st-century philosophersContinental philosophersPhilosophers of culturePhilosophers of languagePolitical philosophersSocial philosophersMoral philosophersPhilosophers of religionPhilosophers of technologyScholars of modern philosophyScholars of nationalismScholars of MarxismLiterary critics of BasqueBasque-language poets1941 birthsLiving peopleUniversity of the Basque Country alumniUniversity of Münster alumniUniversity of the Basque Country facultySpanish essayists20th-century essayists21st-century essayistsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from April 2014Articles with hCardsArticles with German-language external linksArticles with Basque-language external linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers