Land-use planning
See also: Planning permission






The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (November 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In urban planning, land-use planning seeks to order and regulate land use in an efficient and ethical way, thus preventing land-use conflicts. Governments use land-use planning to manage the development of land within their jurisdictions. In doing so, the governmental unit can plan for the needs of the community while safeguarding natural resources. To this end, it is the systematic assessment of land and water potential, alternatives for land use, and economic and social conditions in order to select and adopt the best land-use options.[1] Often one element of a comprehensive plan, a land-use plan provides a vision for the future possibilities of development in neighborhoods, districts, cities, or any defined planning area.
In the United States, the terms land-use planning, regional planning, urban planning, and urban design are often used interchangeably, and will depend on the state, county, and/or project in question. Despite confusing nomenclature, the essential function of land-use planning remains the same whatever term is applied. The Canadian Institute of Planners offers a definition that land-use planning means the scientific, aesthetic, and orderly disposition of land, resources, facilities and services with a view to securing the physical, economic and social efficiency, health and well-being of urban and rural communities.[2] The American Planning Association states that the goal of land-use planning is to further the welfare of people and their communities by creating convenient, equitable, healthful, efficient, and attractive environments for present and future generations.[3]



Contents


1 History
2 Types of planning
3 Methods
4 Basis of land-use planning authority in the United States
5 See also
6 Academic journals
7 References

7.1 Notes
7.2 Bibliography


8 External links



History[edit]
Land-use planning often leads to land-use regulation, which typically encompasses zoning. Zoning regulates the types of activities that can be accommodated on a given piece of land, as well as the amount of space devoted to those activities, and the ways that buildings may be situated and shaped.[4]
The ambiguous nature of the term “planning”, as it relates to land use, is historically tied to the practice of zoning. Zoning in the US came about in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to protect the interests of property owners. The practice was found to be constitutionally sound by the Supreme Court decision of Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. in 1926.[3] Soon after, the Standard State Zoning Enabling Act gave authority to the states to regulate land use. Even so, the practice remains controversial today.
The “taking clause” of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits the government from taking private property for public use without just compensation. The case of Dolan v. City of Tigard demonstrated the criteria that determine the threshold of what is considered taking.[5] One interpretation of the taking clause is that any restriction on the development potential of land through zoning regulation is a “taking”. A deep-rooted anti-zoning sentiment exists in America, that no one has the right to tell another what he can or cannot do with his land. Ironically, although people are often averse to being told how to develop their own land, they tend to expect the government to intervene when a proposed land use is undesirable.
Conventional zoning has not typically regarded the manner in which buildings relate to one another or the public spaces around them, but rather has provided a pragmatic system for mapping jurisdictions according to permitted land use. This system, combined with the interstate highway system, widespread availability of mortgage loans, growth in the automobile industry, and the over-all post-World War II economic expansion, destroyed most of the character that gave distinctiveness to American cities. The urban sprawl that most US cities began to experience in the mid-twentieth century was, in part, created by a flat approach to land-use regulations. Zoning without planning created unnecessarily exclusive zones. Thoughtless mapping of these zones over large areas was a big part of the recipe for suburban sprawl.[4] It was from the deficiencies of this practice that land-use planning developed, to envision the changes that development would cause and mitigate the negative effects of such change.




Suburban development near Colorado Springs, Colorado, United States


As America grew and sprawl was rampant, the much-loved America of the older towns, cities, or streetcar suburbs essentially became illegal through zoning.[6] Unparalleled growth and unregulated development changed the look and feel of landscapes and communities. They strained commercial corridors and affected housing prices, causing citizens to fear a decline in the social, economic and environmental attributes that defined their quality of life.[7] Zoning regulations became politically contentious as developers, legislators, and citizens struggled over altering zoning maps in a way that was acceptable to all parties. Land use planning practices evolved as an attempt to overcome these challenges. It engages citizens and policy-makers to plan for development with more intention, foresight, and community focus than had been previously used.
Types of planning[edit]
Various types of planning have emerged over the course of the 20th century. Below are the six main typologies of planning, as defined by David Walters in his book, Designing Communities (2007):

Traditional or comprehensive planning: Common in the US after World War II, characterized by politically neutral experts with a rational view of the new urban development. Focused on producing clear statements about the form and content of new development.
Systems planning: 1950s–1970s, resulting from the failure of comprehensive planning to deal with the unforeseen growth of post World War II America. More analytical view of the planning area as a set of complex processes, less interested in a physical plan.
Democratic planning: 1960s. Result of societal loosening of class and race barriers. Gave more citizens a voice in planning for future of community.
Advocacy and equity planning: 1960s & 70s. Strands of democratic planning that sought specifically to address social issues of inequality and injustice in community planning.
Strategic planning: 1960s-present. Recognizes small-scale objectives and pragmatic real-world constraints.
Environmental planning: 1960s-present. Developed as many of the ecological and social implications of global development were first widely understood.[6]
Tenure responsive planning: 2015-onwards. It recognizes that land use planning should be collaborative but with the purpose of tenure security improvement. This is a hybrid approach whereby traditional, advocacy, democratic and bottom-up efforts are merged in such a way that they focus towards tenure security outcomes. [8]

Today, successful planning involves a balanced mix of analysis of the existing conditions and constraints; extensive public engagement; practical planning and design; and financially and politically feasible strategies for implementation.[7]
Current processes include a combination of strategic and environmental planning. It is becoming more widely understood that any sector of land has a certain capacity for supporting human, animal, and vegetative life in harmony, and that upsetting this balance has dire consequences on the environment. Planners and citizens often take on an advocacy role during the planning process in an attempt to influence public policy.[6] Due to a host of political and economic factors, governments are slow to adopt land use policies that are congruent with scientific data supporting more environmentally sensitive regulations.
Since the 1990s, the activist/environmentalist approach to planning has grown into the Smart Growth movement, characterized by the focus on more sustainable and less environmentally damaging forms of development.[6] Moreover, there is changes on the requirements of land use planning overtime. For example, whilst most of the urban planners suggest the distance from the landfill that a housing estate should be built, they must also take wind direction into consideration [9]




Aerial view of Rosslyn-Ballston corridor in Arlington, Virginia. High density, mixed use development is concentrated within ¼–½ mile from the Rosslyn, Court House and Clarendon Washington Metro stations (shown in red), with limited density outside that area. This photograph is taken from the United States Environmental Protection Agency [10] website describing Arlington's award for overall excellence in smart growth in 2002 — the first ever granted by the agency.


Smart growth supports the integration of mixed land uses into communities as a critical component of achieving better places to live. Putting uses in close proximity to one another has benefits for transportation alternatives to driving, security, community cohesiveness, local economies, and general quality of life issues. Smart growth strives to provide a means for communities to alter the planning context which currently renders mixed land uses illegal in most of the country.[11]
Methods[edit]
Professional planners work in the public sector for governmental and non-profit agencies, and in the private sector for businesses related to land, community, and economic development. Through research, design, and analysis of data, a planner's work is to create a plan for some aspect of a community. This process typically involves gathering public input to develop the vision and goals for the community.
A charrette is a facilitated planning workshop often used by professional planners to gather information from their clients and the public about the project at hand. Charettes involve a diverse set of stakeholders in the planning process, to ensure that the final plan comprehensively addresses the study area.
Geographic Information Systems, or GIS, is a very useful and important tool in land-use planning. It uses aerial photography to show land parcels, topography, street names, and other pertinent information. GIS systems contain layers of graphic information and their relational databases that may be projected into maps that allow the user to view a composite of a specific area, adding an array of graphically oriented decision making tools to the planning process.[7]
A transect, as used in planning, is a hierarchical scale of environmental zones that define a land area by its character, ranging from rural, preserved land to urban centers. As a planning methodology, the transect is used as a tool for managing growth and sustainability by planning land use around the physical character of the land. This allows a community to plan for growth while preserving the natural and historical nature of their environment.[7]
Natural ecology and historical identity of the city are matched to its topography in the Urban Landscape System approach that intends to mitigate effects of climate change and improve city branding through the ontology of place.
Basis of land-use planning authority in the United States[edit]
Police power is the basis for land use planning authority in the United States. This authority is usually delegated by state governments to local governments, including counties and cities. It is these local governments that most frequently exercise police power in land use planning matters. The regulation of land use based on police power is distinct from the taking of private property by the government through the power of eminent domain. If the regulation of land use is done under the authority of the police power, the private property owner isn't typically entitled to compensation as they would be if property was taken under the power of eminent domain. The court decision in the case Commonwealth v. Alger was related to land use planning and dealt with the construction of a wharf on privately owned tidelands around Boston Harbor.[12]
See also[edit]


Environmental planning
Federal Land Use Policy Act of 1976
Geographic Information Systems
Inter-municipal land use planning
Landscape architecture
Landscape planning
Regional planning
Smart growth
Spatial planning
Sustainable development
Transportation planning
Urban design
Urban planning
Village Development Committee (India)


Academic journals[edit]
Main article: List of planning journals

Environment and Planning
Land Use Policy
Journal of Land Use and Environmental Law
Journal of the American Planning Association
Planning Theory

References[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ Young, A., 2003
^ Canadian Institute of Planners, 2011
^ a b American Planning Association, 2011
^ a b Barnett, J., 2004
^ Martha Derthick. Dilemmas of Scale in America's Federal Democracy. p. 257. 
^ a b c d Walters, D., 2007
^ a b c d Southwestern NC Planning and Economic Development Commission, Community Foundation of WNC, & the Lawrence Group Architects of NC, Inc., 2009
^ Chigbu et al. (2016). Combining land-use planning and tenure security: a tenure responsive land-use planning approach for developing countries. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2016.1245655
^ Li, Rita Yi Man and Li, Herru Ching Yu (2018). Have Housing Prices Gone with the Smelly Wind? Big Data Analysis on Landfill in Hong Kong. Sustainability, 10(2), 341; doi:10.3390/su10020341
^ "Arlington County, Virginia - National Award for Smart Growth Achievement - 2002 Winners Presentation | Smart Growth | US EPA". Epa.gov. 2006-06-28. Retrieved 2012-12-30. 
^ Smart Growth Network, 2011
^ Understanding the Law of Zoning and Land Use Controls, Barlow Burke, Lexisnexis, Chapter 1, Published 2002



Bibliography[edit]

Barnet, J. (2004). Codifying New Urbanism: How to Reform Municipal Land Development Regulations, Chicago, IL.
Southwestern NC Planning and Economic Development Commission, Community Foundation of WNC, & the Lawrence Group Architects of NC, Inc. (2009). Region A Toolbox, A Pilot of the Mountain Landscapes Initiative, Sylva, NC.
Walters, David. (2007). Designing Community, Charrettes, Master plans and Form-based Codes, Oxford, UK.
Young, Anthony. (1993). Guidelines for Land Use Planning, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.

External links[edit]

American Planning Association, Chicago, IL
"Planning Is ...", Canadian Institute of Planners, Ottawa, ON
Smart Growth Online, National Center for Appropriate Technology, Butte, MT
"Arlington County, Virginia", U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC
"An overview of spatial policy in Asian and European countries", Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MILT), Japan







v
t
e


Urban planning



General



Land use
Planning
Planning and zoning commission
Growth management
Development economics
Social sciences
Public policy
World Urbanism Day





Major
branches




Urban



Land-use planning
Comprehensive planning (US)
Spatial planning (Eur)
Planned cities
Planned community / Model village
Redevelopment
Urban design
Urbanism





Rural



Conservation development
Preservation development
Rural housing
Village design statement (UK)





Regional



Regional Planning Association of America





Environmental



Environmental design
Environmental impact assessment
Environmental planning
Recreation resource planning
Sustainable development





Transportation planning



Transportation forecasting
Trip distribution
Rational planning model
Transit-oriented development
Professional transportation planner
Urban freight distribution





Economic Development



Community economic development








Concepts/
theories




Movements



Athens Charter
Car-free movement
City Beautiful movement
Dark-sky movement
Garden city movement
Indigenous planning
New Urbanism
Settlement movement
Smart growth
Structuralism
Transition towns





Theories



Collaborative planning
Context theory
Ekistics
Intelligent urbanism
Livable streets
Market urbanism
Radical planning
Urban acupuncture
Urban renewal





Concepts



Affordable housing
Cityscape
Cluster development
Creative city
Company town
Complete Communities
Eminent domain (US)
Gentrification / Brusselization
Infill
Healthy cities / Healthy community design
LEED-ND
Mixed-use development
Model cities
New town
Placemaking
Planned community
Planning gain
Planning Permission (U.K.)
Suburbia
Temporary use
Third place
Tract housing
Urban decay
Urban sprawl
Urbanization
Verticalization / High-rise urbanism
Zoning








People




Theorists/
practitioners



Thomas Adams
Donald Appleyard
Edmund Bacon
Guy Benveniste
Colin Buchanan
Daniel Burnham
Peter Calthorpe
Konstantinos Doxiadis
Andrés Duany
Patrick Geddes
Ebenezer Howard
Kevin A. Lynch
Ian McHarg
Clarence Perry
James Rouse
Clarence Stein
Raymond Unwin
List of urban theorists
List of urban planners








Critics



Elizabeth Farrelly
Jane Jacobs
James Howard Kunstler
Lewis Mumford
Randal O'Toole








Related
disciplines



Architecture
Civil engineering
Urban ecology
Geography
Land development
Landscape architecture
Marine spatial planning
Public health
Real estate development








 Category
Index of urban planning articles
List of planned cities
List of planning journals
 Commons












v
t
e


Environmental social science



Fields



Ecological anthropology
Ecological economics
Environmental anthropology
Environmental economics
Environmental communication
Environmental history
Environmental politics
Environmental psychology
Environmental sociology
Human ecology
Human geography
Political ecology
Regional science








Related



Agroecology
Anthrozoology
Behavioral geography
Community studies
Demography
Design

ecological
environmental


Ecological humanities
Economics

energy
thermo


Environmental

education
ethics
law
science
studies


Ethnobiology

botany
ecology
zoology


Forestry
Industrial ecology
Integrated geography
Permaculture
Rural sociology
Science, technology and society

science studies


Sustainability

science
studies


Systems ecology
Urban

ecology
geography
metabolism
studies







Applied



Architecture

landscape
sustainable


Ecopsychology
Engineering

ecological
environmental


Green criminology
Health

environmental
epidemiology
occupational
public


Management

environmental
fisheries
forest
natural resource
waste


Planning

environmental
land use
regional
spatial
urban


Policy

energy
environmental










 Environment portal
 Category
Concepts
Degrees
Journals
Research institutes
Scholars












v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological
land


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources












v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity










Categories: Land useHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from November 2011USA-centricPages using div col with deprecated parameters