Persuasion
For other uses, see Persuasion (disambiguation).


Communication


Portal · History


General Aspects




Communication theory
Information
Semiotics
Language
Logic
Sociology




Fields




Discourse analysis
Linguistics
Mass communication
Organizational communication
Pragmatics
Semiotics
Sociolinguistics




Disciplines




Public speaking
Interaction
Discourse
Culture
Argumentation
Persuasion
Research
Rhetoric
Literature
Philosophy




Categories




Outline







v
t
e









Persuasion, novel by Jane Austen. Illustrated by C. E. Brock for Sir Walter Elliot, baronet, the hints of Mr Shepherd, his agent, were quite unwelcome


Persuasion is an umbrella term of influence. Persuasion can attempt to influence a person's beliefs, attitudes, intentions, motivations, or behaviors.[1] In business, persuasion is a process aimed at changing a person's (or a group's) attitude or behavior toward some event, idea, object, or other person(s), by using written, spoken words or visual tools to convey information, feelings, or reasoning, or a combination thereof.[2] Persuasion is also an often used tool in the pursuit of personal gain, such as election campaigning, giving a sales pitch,[3] or in trial advocacy. Persuasion can also be interpreted as using one's personal or positional resources to change people's behaviors or attitudes. Systematic persuasion is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to logic and reason. Heuristic persuasion on the other hand is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to habit or emotion.[4]



Contents


1 Brief history
2 Theories

2.1 Attribution theory
2.2 Conditioning theories
2.3 Cognitive dissonance theory
2.4 Elaboration likelihood model
2.5 Functional theories
2.6 Inoculation theory
2.7 Narrative transportation theory
2.8 Social judgment theory


3 Methods

3.1 Usage of force
3.2 Weapons of influence

3.2.1 Reciprocity
3.2.2 Commitment and consistency
3.2.3 Social proof
3.2.4 Likeness
3.2.5 Authority
3.2.6 Scarcity


3.3 Machiavellianism
3.4 Relationship-based persuasion of Shell and Moussa
3.5 List of methods


4 In culture

4.1 Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM)


5 Neurobiology
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Brief history[edit]
Persuasion began with the Greeks, who emphasized rhetoric and elocution as the highest standard for a successful politician. All trials were held in front of the Assembly, and both the prosecution and the defense rested, as they often do today, on the persuasiveness of the speaker.[5] Rhetoric was the ability to find the available means of persuasion in any instance. The Greek philosopher Aristotle listed four reasons why one should learn the art of persuasion:

truth and justice are perfect; thus if a case loses, it is the fault of the speaker
it is an excellent tool for teaching
a good rhetorician needs to know how to argue both sides to understand the whole problem and all the options, and
there is no better way to defend one’s self.

Aristotle's rhetorical proofs:

ethos (credibility)
logos (reason)
pathos (emotion)[6]

Theories[edit]
Attribution theory[edit]
Main article: Attribution (psychology)
Humans attempt to explain the actions of others through either dispositional attribution or situational attribution.
Dispositional attribution, also referred to as internal attribution, attempts to point to a person’s traits, abilities, motives, or dispositions as a cause or explanation for their actions. A citizen criticizing a president by saying the nation is lacking economic progress and health because the president is either lazy or lacking in economic intuition is utilizing a dispositional attribution.
Situational attribution, also referred to as external attribution, attempts to point to the context around the person and factors of his surroundings, particularly things that are completely out of his control. A citizen claiming that a lack of economic progress is not a fault of the president but rather the fact that he inherited a poor economy from the previous president is situational attribution.
Fundamental attribution error occurs when people wrongly attribute either a shortcoming or accomplishment to internal factors, and disregarding any external factors. In general, people tend to make dispositional attributions more often than situational attributions when trying to explain or understand a person’s behavior. This happens when we are much more focused on the individual because we do not know much about their situation or context. When trying to persuade others to like us or another person, we tend to explain positive behaviors and accomplishments with dispositional attribution, but our own negative behaviors and shortcomings with situational attributions.[7]
Conditioning theories[edit]
Main article: Classical conditioning
Conditioning plays a huge part in the concept of persuasion. It is more often about leading someone into taking certain actions of their own, rather than giving direct commands. In advertisements for example, this is done by attempting to connect a positive emotion to a brand/product logo. This is often done by creating commercials that make people laugh, using a sexual undertone, inserting uplifting images and/or music etc. and then ending the commercial with a brand/product logo. Great examples of this are professional athletes. They are paid to connect themselves to things that can be directly related to their roles; sport shoes, tennis rackets, golf balls, or completely irrelevant things like soft drinks, popcorn poppers and panty hose. The important thing for the advertiser is to establish a connection to the consumer.[8]
This conditioning is thought to affect how people view certain products, knowing that most purchases are made on the basis of emotion. Just like you sometimes recall a memory from a certain smell or sound, the objective of some ads is solely to bring back certain emotions when you see their logo in your local store. The hope is that repeating the message several times makes consumers more likely to purchase the product because they already connect it with a good emotion and positive experience. Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow did a comprehensive study on the effects of persuasion in different domains. They discovered that persuasion has little or no effect on advertisement; however, there was a substantial effect of persuasion on voting if there was face-to-face contact.[9]
Cognitive dissonance theory[edit]
Main article: Cognitive dissonance
Leon Festinger originally proposed the theory of cognitive dissonance in 1957. He theorized that human beings constantly strive for mental consistency. Our cognition (thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes) can be in agreement, unrelated, or in disagreement with each other. Our cognition can also be in agreement or disagreement with our behaviors. When we detect conflicting cognition, or dissonance, it gives us a sense of incompleteness and discomfort. For example, a person who is addicted to smoking cigarettes but also suspects it could be detrimental to his health suffers from cognitive dissonance.
Festinger suggests that we are motivated to reduce this dissonance until our cognition is in harmony with itself. We strive for mental consistency. There are four main ways we go about reducing or eliminating our dissonance:

changing our minds about one of the facets of cognition
reducing the importance of a cognition
increasing the overlap between the two, and
re-evaluating the cost/reward ratio.

Revisiting the example of the smoker, he can either quit smoking, reduce the importance of his health, convince himself he is not at risk, or that the reward of smoking is worth the cost of his health.
Cognitive dissonance is powerful when it relates to competition and self-concept. The most famous example of how cognitive dissonance can be used for persuasion comes from Festinger and Carlsmith’s 1959 experiment in which participants were asked to complete a very dull task for an hour. Some were paid $20, while others were paid $1, and afterwards they were instructed to tell the next waiting participants that the experiment was fun and exciting. Those who were paid $1 were much more likely to convince the next participants that the experiment really was enjoyable than those who received $20. This is because $20 is enough reason to participate in a dull task for an hour, so there is no dissonance. Those who received $1 experienced great dissonance, so they had to truly convince themselves that the task actually was enjoyable to avoid feeling taken advantage of, and therefore reduce their dissonance.[10]
Elaboration likelihood model[edit]
Main article: Elaboration likelihood model
Persuasion has traditionally been associated with two routes.[11]

Central route: Whereby an individual evaluates information presented to them based on the pros and cons of it and how well it supports their values
Peripheral route: Change is mediated by how attractive the source of communication is and by bypassing the deliberation process.[11]

The Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) forms a new facet of the route theory. It holds that the probability of effective persuasion depends on how successful the communication is at bringing to mind a relevant mental representation, which is the elaboration likelihood. Thus if the target of the communication is personally relevant, this increases the elaboration likelihood of the intended outcome and would be more persuasive if it were through the central route. Communication which does not require careful thought would be better suited to the peripheral route.[12]
Functional theories[edit]
Functional theorists attempt to understand the divergent attitudes individuals have towards people, objects or issues in different situations.[13] There are four main functional attitudes:

Adjustment function: A main motivation for individuals is to increase positive external rewards and minimize the costs. Attitudes serve to direct behavior towards the rewards and away from punishment.
Ego Defensive function: The process by which an individual protects their ego from being threatened by their own negative impulses or threatening thoughts.
Value-expressive: When an individual derives pleasure from presenting an image of themselves which is in line with their self-concept and the beliefs that they want to be associated with.
Knowledge function: The need to attain a sense of understanding and control over one’s life. An individual’s attitudes therefore serve to help set standards and rules which govern their sense of being.[13]

When communication targets an underlying function, its degree of persuasiveness influences whether individuals change their attitude after determining that another attitude would more effectively fulfill that function.[14]
Inoculation theory[edit]
Main article: Inoculation theory
A vaccine introduces a weak form of a virus that can easily be defeated to prepare the immune system should it need to fight off a stronger form of the same virus. In much the same way, the theory of inoculation suggests that a certain party can introduce a weak form of an argument that is easily thwarted in order to make the audience inclined to disregard a stronger, full-fledged form of that argument from an opposing party.
This often occurs in negative advertisements and comparative advertisements—both for products and political causes. An example would be a manufacturer of a product displaying an ad that refutes one particular claim made about a rival’s product, so that when the audience sees an ad for said rival product, they refute the product claims automatically.[15]
Narrative transportation theory[edit]
Main article: Transportation theory (psychology)
Narrative transportation theory proposes that when people lose themselves in a story, their attitudes and intentions change to reflect that story. The mental state of narrative transportation can explain the persuasive effect of stories on people, who may experience narrative transportation when certain contextual and personal preconditions are met, as Green and Brock[16] postulate for the transportation-imagery model. Narrative transportation occurs whenever the story receiver experiences a feeling of entering a world evoked by the narrative because of empathy for the story characters and imagination of the story plot.
Social judgment theory[edit]
Main article: Social judgment theory
Social judgment theory suggests that when people are presented with an idea or any kind of persuasive proposal, their natural reaction is to immediately seek a way to sort the information subconsciously and react to it. We evaluate the information and compare it with the attitude we already have, which is called the initial attitude or anchor point.
When trying to sort incoming persuasive information, an audience evaluates whether it lands in their latitude of acceptance, latitude of non-commitment or indifference, or the latitude of rejection. The size of these latitudes varies from topic to topic. Our "ego-involvement" generally plays one of the largest roles in determining the size of these latitudes. When a topic is closely connected to how we define and perceive ourselves, or deals with anything we care passionately about, our latitudes of acceptance and non-commitment are likely to be much smaller and our attitude of rejection much larger. A person’s anchor point is considered to be the center of his latitude of acceptance, the position that is most acceptable to him.
An audience is likely to distort incoming information to fit into their unique latitudes. If something falls within the latitude of acceptance, the subject tends to assimilate the information and consider it closer to his anchor point than it really is. Inversely, if something falls within the latitude of rejection, the subject tends to contrast the information and convince himself the information is farther away from his anchor point than it really is.
When trying to persuade an individual target or an entire audience, it is vital to first learn the average latitudes of acceptance, non-commitment, and rejection of your audience. It is ideal to use persuasive information that lands near the boundary of the latitude of acceptance if the goal is to change the audience’s anchor point. Repeatedly suggesting ideas on the fringe of the acceptance latitude makes people gradually adjust their anchor points, while suggesting ideas in the rejection latitude or even the non-commitment latitude does not change the audience’s anchor point.[17]
Methods[edit]




The art of persuasion'--returning from a ball in India from "The Graphic", 1890


Persuasion methods are also sometimes referred to as persuasion tactics or persuasion strategies.
Usage of force[edit]
There is the usage of force in persuasion, which does not have any scientific theories, except for its use to make demands. The use of force is then a precedent to the failure of less direct means of persuasion. Application of this strategy can be interpreted as a threat since the persuader does not give options to his or her request.
Weapons of influence[edit]
Robert Cialdini, in Influence, his book on persuasion, defined six "influence cues or weapons of influence":[18] Influence is the process of changing.
Reciprocity[edit]
Main article: Norm of reciprocity
The principle of reciprocity states that when a person provides us with something, we attempt to repay him or her in kind. Reciprocation produces a sense of obligation, which can be a powerful tool in persuasion. The reciprocity rule is effective because it can be overpowering and instill in us a sense of obligation. Generally, we have a dislike for individuals who neglect to return a favor or provide payment when offered a free service or gift. As a result, reciprocation is a widely held principle. This societal standard makes reciprocity extremely powerful persuasive technique, as it can result in unequal exchanges and can even apply to an uninvited first favor.
Commitment and consistency[edit]
Consistency is an important aspect of persuasion because it:

is highly valued by society,
results in a beneficial approach to daily life, and
provides a valuable shortcut through the complicated nature of modern existence.

Consistency allows us to more effectively make decisions and process information. The concept of consistency states that someone who commits to something, orally or in writing, is more likely to honor that commitment. This is especially true for written commitments, as they appear psychologically more concrete and can create hard proof. Someone who commits to a stance tends to behave according to that commitment. Commitment is an effective persuasive technique, because once you get someone to commit, they are more likely to engage in self-persuasion, providing themselves and others with reasons and justifications to support their commitment in order to avoid dissonance. Cialdini notes Chinese brainwashing of American prisoners of war to rewrite their self-image and gain automatic unenforced compliance. Another example is children being made to repeat the Pledge of Allegiance each morning and why marketers make you close popups by saying “I’ll sign up later” or "No thanks, I prefer not making money”.[19]
Social proof[edit]
We, as humans, are influenced by others around us; we want to do what everyone else is.[20][citation needed] People often base their actions and beliefs on what others around them are doing, how others act or what others believe.
"The power of the crowd" is very effective. We all want to know what others are doing around us. We are so obsessed with what others do and how others act, that we then try to be just like other people.[dubious – discuss] Cialdini gives an example that is somewhat like this: In a phone–a–thon, the host says something like, "Operators are waiting, please call now." The only context you have from that statement is that the operators are waiting and not busy. Rather the host may say: "If operators are busy, please call again." This is the technique of social proof. Just by changing three words, it sounds like the lines are busy and other people are calling, so it must be a worthwhile organization.
Social proof is most effective when people are uncertain or when there are similarities in a situation. In uncertain or ambiguous situations, when multiple possibilities create choices we must make, people are likely to conform to what others do. We become more influenced by people around us in situations that present a decision. The other effective situation for social proofing is when there are similarities. We are more prone to change or conform around people who are similar to us. If someone who is similar to you is being controlling and a leader, you are more likely to listen and follow what they say.
Likeness[edit]
This principle is simple and concise. People say "yes" to people that they like. Two major factors contribute to overall likeness. The first is physical attractiveness. People who are physically attractive seem more persuasive. They get what they want and they can easily change others' attitudes. This attractiveness is proven to send favorable messages/impressions of other traits that a person may have, such as talent, kindness, and intelligence. The second factor is similarity. We are more easily persuaded by people we see as similar to ourselves.[21]
Authority[edit]
We have the tendency to believe that if an expert says something, then it must be true. People like to listen to those who are knowledgeable and trustworthy, so if you can be those two things, then you are already on your way to getting people to believe and listen to you.
In the Milgram study, a series of experiments begun in 1961, a "teacher" and a "learner" were placed in two different rooms. The "learner" was attached to an electric harness that could administer shock. The "teacher" was told by a supervisor, dressed in a white scientist's coat, to ask the learner questions and punish him when he got a question wrong. The teacher was instructed by the study supervisor to deliver an electric shock from a panel under the teacher's control. After delivery, the teacher had to up the voltage to the next notch. The voltage went up to 450 volts. The catch to this experiment was that the teacher did not know that the learner was an actor faking the pain sounds he heard and was not actually being harmed. The experiment was being done to see how obedient we are to authority. "When an authority tells ordinary people it is their job to deliver harm, how much suffering will each subject be willing to inflict on an entirely innocent other person if the instructions come 'from above'?." In this study the results show that most teachers were willing to give as much pain as was available to them. The conclusion was that people are willing to bring pain upon others when they are directed to do so by some authority figure.
Scarcity[edit]






This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Scarcity could play an important role in the process of persuasion.[22][citation needed] When something has limited availability, people assign it more value. According to Cialdini, "people want more of what they cannot have." When scarcity is an issue, the context matters. This means that within certain contexts, scarcity "works" better. To get people to believe that something is scarcer, marketers explain what about that certain product provides what no other product does. Marketers also get people to believe something is scarce by telling them what they will lose, not what they will gain—using statements like, "You will lose $5," rather than, "Save $5." There are two major reasons why the scarcity principle works:

When things are difficult to get, they are usually more valuable, so that can make it seem to have better quality.
When things become less available, we could lose the chance to acquire them.

When this happens, we assign the scarce item or service more value simply because it is harder to acquire.
This principle is that we all want things that are out of our reach. If we see something is easily available, we do not want it as much as something that is very rare.
Machiavellianism[edit]
Machiavellianism employs the tools of manipulation and deceit to gain wealth and power.
Relationship-based persuasion of Shell and Moussa[edit]
In their book The Art of Woo, G. Richard Shell and Mario Moussa present a four-step approach to strategic persuasion.[23] They explain that persuasion means to win others over, not to defeat them. Thus it is important to see the topic from different angles in order to anticipate the reaction others have to a proposal.

Step 1: Survey the situation
This step includes an analysis of the persuader's situation, goals, and challenges that the persuader faces in his or her organization.
Step 2: Confront the five barriers
Five obstacles pose the greatest risks to a successful influence encounter: relationships, credibility, communication mismatches, belief systems, and interest and needs.
Step 3: Make the pitch
People need a solid reason to justify a decision, yet at the same time many decisions are made on the basis of intuition. This step also requires presentation skills.
Step 4: Secure commitments
To safeguard the longtime success of a persuasive decision, it is vital to deal with politics at both the individual and organizational level.

List of methods[edit]
By appeal to reason:

Logic
Logical argument
Rhetoric
Scientific evidence (proof)
Scientific method

By appeal to emotion:

Cosmetic Advertising
Presentation and Imagination
Pity
Propaganda
Psychological manipulation
Seduction
Tradition

Aids to persuasion:

Body language
Communication skill or Rhetoric
Personality tests and conflict style inventory help devise strategy based on an individual's preferred style of interaction
Sales techniques

Other techniques:

Deception
Hypnosis
Power (social and political)
Subliminal advertising

Coercive techniques, some of which are highly controversial or not scientifically proven effective:

Brainwashing
Coercive persuasion
Force
Mind control
Torture







This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In culture[edit]
It is through a basic cultural personal definition of persuasion that everyday people understand how others are attempting to influence them and then how they influence others. The dialogue surrounding persuasion is constantly evolving because of the necessity to use persuasion in everyday life. Persuasion tactics traded in society have influences from researchers, which may sometimes be misinterpreted. To keep evolutionary advantage, in the sense of wealth and survival, you must persuade and not be persuaded. To understand cultural persuasion, researchers gather knowledge from domains such as "buying, selling, advertising, and shopping, as well as parenting and courting."[24]
Methods of persuasion vary by culture, both in prevalence and effectiveness. For example, advertisements tend to appeal to different values according to whether they are used in collectivistic or individualistic cultures.[25]
Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM)[edit]
The Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM) was created by Friestad and Wright in 1994. This framework allows the researchers to analyze the process of gaining and using everyday persuasion knowledge. The researchers suggest the necessity of including "the relationship and interplay between everyday folk knowledge and scientific knowledge on persuasion, advertising, selling, and marketing in general."[24]
To educate the general population about research findings and new knowledge about persuasion, a teacher must draw on their pre-existing beliefs from folk persuasion to make the research relevant and informative to lay people, which creates "mingling of their scientific insights and commonsense beliefs."[24]
As a result of this constant mingling, the issue of persuasion expertise becomes messy. Expertise status can be interpreted from a variety of sources like job titles, celebrity, or published scholarship.
It is through this multimodal process that we create concepts like, "Stay away from car salesmen, they will try to trick you." The kind of persuasion techniques blatantly employed by car salesmen creates an innate distrust of them in popular culture. According to Psychology Today, they employ tactics ranging from making personal life ties with the customer to altering reality by handing the customer the new car keys before the purchase.[26]
Neurobiology[edit]
Attitudes and persuasion are among the central issues of social behavior. One of the classic questions is when are attitudes a predictor of behavior. Previous research suggested that selective activation of left prefrontal cortex might increase the likelihood that an attitude would predict a relevant behavior. Using lateral attentional manipulation, this was supported.[27]
An earlier article showed that EEG measures of anterior prefrontal asymmetry might be a predictor of persuasion. Research participants were presented with arguments that favored and arguments that opposed the attitudes they already held. Those whose brain was more active in left prefrontal areas said that they paid the most attention to statements with which they agreed while those with a more active right prefrontal area said that they paid attention to statements that disagreed.[28] This is an example of defensive repression, the avoidance or forgetting of unpleasant information. Research has shown that the trait of defensive repression is related to relative left prefrontal activation.[29] In addition, when pleasant or unpleasant words, probably analogous to agreement or disagreement, were seen incidental to the main task, an fMRI scan showed preferential left prefrontal activation to the pleasant words.[30]
One way therefore to increase persuasion would seem to be to selectively activate the right prefrontal cortex. This is easily done by monaural stimulation to the contralateral ear. The effect apparently depends on selective attention rather than merely the source of stimulation. This manipulation had the expected outcome: more persuasion for messages coming from the left.[31]
See also[edit]


Attitude-behavior consistency
Captatio benevolentiae
Compliance gaining
Judge–advisor system
Perception management
Regulatory focus theory
Sleeper effect
Social marketing


References[edit]


^ Gass, Robert H. Seiter, John S. (2010). Persuasion, social influence, and compliance gaining (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. p. 33. ISBN 0-205-69818-2. 
^ "Persuasion". Business Dictionary. Retrieved 9 May 2012. 
^ Fautsch, Leo (January 2007). "Persuasion". The American Salesman. 52 (1): 13–16. Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ Schacter, Daniel L., Daniel T. Gilbert, and Daniel M. Wegner. "The Accuracy Motive: right is better than wrong-Persuasion." Psychology. ; Second Edition. New York: Worth, Incorporated, 2011. 532. Print,
^ Ancient greece
^ Higgins, Colin; Walker, Robyn (September 2012). "Ethos, logos, pathos: Strategies of persuasion in social/environmental reports". Accounting Forum. 36: 194–208. doi:10.1016/j.accfor.2012.02.003. Retrieved 20 August 2015. 
^ "Fundamental Attribution Error". changingminds.org. 
^ Cialdini, R.B. (2007). "Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion" New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
^ DellaVigna, S.; Gentzko, M. (2010). "Persuasion: Empirical evidence". Annual Review of Economics. 2: 643–69. doi:10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.12430. 
^ "Cognitive Dissonance Theory". Simply Psychology. Retrieved 30 April 2014. 
^ a b Petty; Cacioppo (1986). "The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion". Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 19 (1): 123–205. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60214-2. 
^ Petty; Cacioppo; Schumann (1983). "Central and peripheral routes to advertising effectiveness: The moderating role of involvement" (PDF). Journal of Consumer Research. 10 (2): 135–146. doi:10.1086/208954. 
^ a b Katz, D. (1960). "The functional approach to the study of attitudes". Public Opinion Quarterly. 24 (2): 163–204. doi:10.1086/266945. 
^ DeBono, K.G. (1987). "Investigating the social-adjustive and value-expressive functions of attitudes: Implications for persuasion processes". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 52 (2): 279–287. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.52.2.279. 
^ Jenah Schwartswalder (14 February 2001). "Innoculation Theory - Persuasion Context". Uky.edu. Retrieved 30 April 2014. 
^ Green, M. C., & Brock, T. C. (2002). "In the mind's eye: Transportation-imagery model of narrative persuasion." In M. C. Green, J. J. Strange & T. C. Brock (Eds.), Narrative impact: Social and cognitive foundations. (pp. 315-341). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
^ "Social Judgment Theory | Persuasion Blog". Healthyinfluence.com. 22 April 2014. Retrieved 30 April 2014. 
^ Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Influence: Science and practice (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
^ "What are the 6 principles of influence?". conceptually.org. Retrieved October 25, 2017. 
^ Frary, By Mark. "The six principles of the psychology of persuasion". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-03-16. 
^ Burger, Jerry M.; Messian, Nicole; Patel, Shebani; Prado, Alicia del; Anderson, Carmen (1 January 2004). "What a Coincidence! The Effects of Incidental Similarity on Compliance". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 30 (1): 35–43. doi:10.1177/0146167203258838. ISSN 0146-1672. PMID 15030641. 
^ Aguirre-Rodriguez, Alexandra (October 2013). "The Effect of Consumer Persuasion Knowledge on Scarcity Appeal Persuasiveness". Journal of Advertising. 42: 4 – via Taylor and Francis. 
^ The art of Woo by G. Richard Shell and Mario Moussa, New York 2007, ISBN 978-1-59184-176-0
^ a b c Friestad, Marian; Wright, Peter. Everyday persuasion knowledge. Psychology & Marketing16. 2 (Mar 1999)
^ Han, S., & Shavitt, S. (1994). Persuasion and Culture: Advertising Appeals in Individualistic and Collectivistic Societies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 326-350.
^ Lawson, Willow. Persuasion:Battle on the Car Lot, Psychology Today published on 1 September 2005 - last reviewed on 31 July 2009
^ Drake, R. A.; Sobrero, A. P. (1987). "Lateral orientation effects upon trait behavior and attitude behavior consistency". Journal of Social Psychology. 127: 639–651. 
^ Cacioppo, J. T.; Petty, R. E.; Quintanar, L. R. (1982). "Individual differences in relative hemispheric alpha abundance and cognitive responses to persuasive communications". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 43: 623–636. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.43.3.623. 
^ Tomarken, A. J.; Davidson, R. J. (1994). "Frontal brain activity in repressors and nonrepressors". Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 103: 339–349. doi:10.1037/0021-843x.103.2.339. 
^ Herrington, J. D., Mohanty, A., Koven, N. S., Fisher, J. E., Stewart, J. L., Banich, M. T., et al. (2005). Emotion-modulated performance and activity in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex" Emotion 5, 200-207. Free full-text.
^ Drake, R. A.; Bingham, B. R. (1985). "Induced lateral orientation and persuasibility". Brain and Cognition. 4: 156–164. doi:10.1016/0278-2626(85)90067-3. 



Higgins, C.; Walker, R. (2012). "Ethos, logos, pathos: Strategies of persuasion in social/environmental reports". Accounting Forum. 36 (3): 194–208. doi:10.1016/j.accfor.2012.02.003. 

Further reading[edit]

Cialdini, Robert B. "Harnessing the Science of Persuasion" (Archive). Harvard Business Review. October 2001.
Herbert I. Abelson, Persuasion, "How opinions and attitudes are changed" 1959
Richard E. Vatz, "The Only Authentic Book of Persuasion" Kendall Hunt, 2013

External links[edit]



Look up persuasion in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.








v
t
e


Greater and lesser magic



Greater magic




Concepts



Abreaction
Adrenal energy
Autosuggestion
Catharsis
Classical element / cardinal direction
Closet drama
Creative visualization
Flow
Forces of nature
Hyperfocus
Imagination
Liturgical drama
Magical thinking
Mental energy
Mental image
Mental representation
Mind's eye
Performativity
Power of suggestion
Psychodrama
Psychotherapy
Pygmalion effect
Self-hypnosis
Sense of wonder
Subjective validation
Synchronicity
Thomas theorem
Willful suspension of disbelief
Wishful thinking





Activity



Ave Satanas
Barbarous name
Benediction
Black Mass
Ceremony
Curse
Diabolical rebaptism
Emotional exorcism
Enochian Keys
Evocation
Fertility rite
Host desecration
Incantation
The infernal names
Invocation
Magic word
Masturbation
Osculum infame
Purification
Rite
Ritual
Sexual ritual
Shemhamphorasch
Sign of the horns
So mote it be
Spell
Theatrical séance
Voodoo





Tools



Altar
Altarpiece (see Sigil of Baphomet)
Bell
Candles
Chalice
Effigy
Electrostatic generator
Elixir
Flash powder
Gong
Hooded robe
Imagery
Mask
Parchment
Phallus
Poppet
Scourge
Skull
Sword
Thurible











Lesser magic




Concepts



Barnum effect
Bewitchment
Body image
Body odour and sexual attraction
Charlatanism
Charm
Cold reading
Confidence trick
Enchantment
Eroticism
Evil eye
Fascination
Femininity
Femme fatale
Folk psychology
Gaze
Glamour
Hawthorne effect
Impression management
Kinesics
Lipstick feminism
Love potion
Machiavellianism
Manipulation
Masculinity
Persona
Personality psychology
Personality type
Persuasion
Physical attractiveness
Reactivity
Seduction
Sexual capital
Sleight of hand
Smoke and mirrors
Soft power
Somatotype
Sprezzatura
Stereotype
Trickery
Wile and guile








Related fields



Animal worship
Apotropaic magic
BDSM
Black magic
Body worship
Ceremonial magic
Demonology
Fortune-telling
Herbalism
Hypnotism
Kitchen witchcraft
Love magic
Natural magic
Nature worship
Pow-wow
Sex magic
Sympathetic magic
Voodoo death





Related topics



Psychological theories of magic
Satanic ritual abuse
Medical explanations of bewitchment
Deal with the Devil
Diabolical mark
Left-hand path and right-hand path
Myth and ritual
Cunning folk in Britain
European witchcraft
Magia Naturalis












v
t
e


Media manipulation



Context



Bias
Crowd psychology
Deception
Dumbing down
False balance
Half-truths
Machiavellianism
Media
Obfuscation
Orwellian
Persuasion
Psychological manipulation





Activism



Alternative media
Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstrations
Guerrilla communication
Hacktivism
Internet
Media
Occupations
Petitions
Protests
Youth





Advertising



Billboards
False
Infomercials
Mobiles
Modeling
Radio
Sex
Slogans
Testimonials
TV
Criticism of advertising








Censorship
Regulation






Books
Broadcast law
Burying of scholars
Corporate
Cover-ups
Euphemism
Films
Historical negationism
Internet
Political
Religious
Self





Hoaxing



Alternative facts
April Fools'
Fake news website
Fakelore
Fictitious entries
Forgery
Gaslighting
List
Literary
Racial
Urban legend
Virus





Marketing



Branding
Loyalty
Product
Product placement
Publicity
Research
Word of mouth





News media



Agenda-setting
Broadcasting
Circus
Cycle
False balance
Infotainment
Managing
Narcotizing dysfunction
Newspeak
Pseudo-event
Scrum
Sensationalism
Tabloid journalism





Political campaigning



Advertising
Astroturfing
Attack ad
Canvassing
Character assassination
Charm offensive
Dog-whistle politics
Election promises
Lawn signs
Manifestos
Name recognition
Negative
Push polling
Smear campaign
Wedge issue





Propaganda



Bandwagon
Crowd manipulation
Disinformation
Fearmongering
Framing
Indoctrination
Loaded language
Lying press
National mythology
Techniques





Psychological warfare



Airborne leaflets
False flag
Fifth column
Information (IT)
Lawfare
Political
Public diplomacy
Sedition
Subversion





Public relations



Cult of personality
Doublespeak
Non-apology apology
Reputation management
Slogans
Sound bites
Spin
Transfer
Understatement
Weasel words





Sales



Cold calling
Door-to-door
Pricing
Product demonstrations
Promotion
Promotional merchandise
Telemarketing












v
t
e


Psychological manipulation




Rewarding: pleasant
(positive reinforcement)




Attention
Bribery
Child grooming
Flattery
Gifts
Ingratiation
Love bombing
Nudging
Praise
Seduction
Smiling
Superficial charm
Superficial sympathy






Aversive: unpleasant
(positive punishment)




Anger
Character assassination
Crying
Emotional blackmail
Fearmongering
Frowning
Glaring
Guilt trip
Inattention
Intimidation
Nagging
Nit-picking criticism
Passive aggression
Relational aggression
Sadism
Shaming
Silent treatment
Social rejection
Swearing
Threats
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Yelling





Intermittent or partial
negative reinforcement



Climate of fear
Traumatic bonding





Other techniques



Bait-and-switch
Deception
Denial
Deprogramming
Disinformation
Distortion
Diversion
Divide and rule
Double bind
Entrapment
Evasion
Exaggeration
Gaslighting
Good cop/bad cop
Indoctrination
Low-balling
Lying
Minimisation
Moving the goalposts
Pride-and-ego down
Rationalization
Reid technique
Setting up to fail
Trojan horse
You're either with us, or against us





Contexts



Abuse
Abusive power and control
Advertising
Bullying
Catholic guilt
Confidence trick
Guilt culture
Interrogation
Jewish guilt
Jewish mother stereotype
Moral panic
Media manipulation
Mind control
Mind games
Mobbing
Propaganda
Salesmanship
Scapegoating
Shame culture
Smear campaign
Social engineering (blagging)
Spin
Suggestibility
Whispering campaign





Related topics



Antisocial personality disorder
Assertiveness
Blame
Borderline personality disorder
Carrot and stick
Dumbing down
Enabling
Fallacy
Femme fatale
Gaming the system
Gullibility
Histrionic personality disorder
Impression management
Machiavellianism
Narcissism
Narcissistic personality disorder
Personal boundaries
Persuasion
Popularity
Projection
Psychopathy












v
t
e


Bioethics



Classic principles



Autonomy
Beneficence
Non-maleficence
Justice





Other principles



Authority
Confidentiality
Conscience
Doctrine of double effect
Equality
Equity
Guilt
Mercy
Oath
Ownership
Privacy
Persuasion





Theories



Utilitarianism
Deontology
Consequentialism





Reproduction



Abortion
Reproductive technology
Gender assignment





Genetics



Gender
Gene therapy
Genetic testing
Genetic modification





Death, dying, and emergent situations



Arbitration
Brain death
Cardiac death
Consensus
Court intervention
Death
Ethics committee
Euthanasia
Executor
Family meeting
Mediation
Next of kin
Health care proxy
Suicide
Transplant ethics





Cultural differences



Dignity
Etiquette
Jewish medical ethics
Pain
Suffering
Religion
Respect





Personal conduct



Abuse of trust
Continuity of care
Duty
Gifts
Liability
Lying
Misconduct
Scientific misconduct
Medical misconduct
Competence (law)
Competency
Incompetency
Termination of the patient-physician relationship





Research ethics



Informed consent
Informed assent
Human rights
Institutional review board












v
t
e


World view








Related terms






Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts and factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system













Aspects







Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping





Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fearmongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect





Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship





Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Viral phenomena





Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Conceptual framework
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)





Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables





Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues and Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing
















Examples







Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz





Economic and
political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Veganism





Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism





Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism
















Categories: PersuasionAttitude changeBeliefHidden categories: Use dmy dates from September 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from April 2015Wikipedia articles needing style editing from June 2016All articles needing style editingArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles needing additional references from May 2010All articles needing additional referencesPages using div col without cols and colwidth parametersPages using Columns-list with deprecated parameters