Logical atomism






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Bertrand Russell



Russell in 1916





Views on philosophy
Views on society
Russell's paradox
Russell's teapot
Theory of descriptions
Logical atomism







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Ludwig Wittgenstein






Wittgenstein (second from right), Summer 1920





Early philosophy



Picture theory of language
Truth tables
Truth conditions
Truth functions
State of affairs
Logical necessity









Later philosophy


"Meaning is use"
Language-game
Private language argument
Family resemblance
Ideal language analysis
Rule-following
Form of life
Anti-skepticism
Philosophy of mathematics








Movements


Analytic philosophy
Linguistic turn
Ideal language philosophy
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Ordinary language philosophy
Fideism
Quietism
Therapeutic approach








Works


Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Some Remarks on Logical Form
Blue and Brown Books
Philosophical Remarks
Philosophical Investigations
On Certainty
Culture and Value
Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough

Remarks on the
Foundations of Mathematics

Zettel
Remarks on Colour

Lectures and Conversations on
Aesthetics, Psychology
and Religious Belief









People



Bertrand Russell
G. E. Moore
John Maynard Keynes
Paul Engelmann
Friedrich Waismann
Moritz Schlick
Rudolf Carnap
Francis Skinner
Frank Ramsey
Vienna Circle
G. E. M. Anscombe
Norman Malcolm
Rush Rhees
Peter Winch
Peter Geach
G. H. von Wright









Interpreters



Gordon Baker
Stanley Cavell
James F. Conant
Alice Crary
Cora Diamond
Terry Eagleton
Juliet Floyd
A. C. Grayling
Peter Hacker
Oswald Hanfling
Jaakko Hintikka
Anthony Kenny
Saul Kripke
Warren Goldfarb
Sandra Laugier
Sabina Lovibond
John McDowell
Colin McGinn
Marie McGinn
D. Z. Phillips
Rupert Read
Barry Stroud
Stephen Toulmin
Michael Williams
Crispin Wright









Other topics


Cambridge Apostles

Cambridge University
Moral Sciences Club

New Wittgenstein
Stonborough House









v
t
e





Logical atomism is a philosophical belief that originated in the early 20th century with the development of analytic philosophy. Its principal exponents were the British philosopher Bertrand Russell, the early work of his Austrian-born pupil and colleague Ludwig Wittgenstein, and his German counterpart Rudolf Carnap.[1]
The theory holds that the world consists of ultimate logical "facts" (or "atoms") that cannot be broken down any further. Having originally propounded this stance in his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Wittgenstein rejected it in his later Philosophical Investigations (secs. 46–49, 91 and sec. 81).
The name for this kind of theory was coined in 1918 by Russell in response to what he called "logical holism"—i.e., the belief that the world operates in such a way that no part can be known without the whole being known first.[2] This belief is commonly called monism, and in particular, Russell (and G. E. Moore) were reacting to the absolute idealism dominant then in Britain and exemplified in works of F. H. Bradley and J. M. E. McTaggart.[2]



Contents


1 Origin
2 Principles

2.1 Russell's principles
2.2 Wittgenstein's principles
2.3 Differences between Russell's and Wittgenstein's atomism


3 Influence and decline
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Origin[edit]
The term was first coined in a 1911 essay by Russell entitled "The Basis of Realism." However, it became widely known only when Russell gave a series of lectures in 1918 entitled "The Philosophy of Logical Atomism". Russell was much influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein, as an introductory note explicitly acknowledges.
Russell and Moore broke themselves free from British Idealism which, for nearly 90 years, had dominated British philosophy. Russell would later recall in "My Mental Development"[3] that "with a sense of escaping from prison, we allowed ourselves to think that grass is green, that the sun and stars would exist if no one was aware of them".
Principles[edit]
Russell referred to his atomistic doctrine as contrary to the tier "of the people who more or less follow Hegel" (PLA 178).
The first principle of logical atomism is that the World contains "facts". The facts are complex structures consisting of objects ("particulars"). This he defines as "objects' relations in terms of atomic facts" (PLA 199) is a fact, either from an object with a simple property or from different objects, in relation to each other more easily. In addition, there are judgments ("beliefs"), which are in a relationship to the facts, and by this relationship either true or false.
According to this theory, even ordinary objects of daily life "are apparently complex entities". According to Russell, words like "this" and "that" are used to denote particulars. In contrast, ordinary names such as "Socrates" actually are definitive descriptions. In the analysis of "Plato talks with his pupils", "Plato" needs to be replaced with something like "the man who was the teacher of Aristotle".
In 1905, Russell had already criticized Alexius Meinong, whose theories led to the paradox of the simultaneous existence and non-existence of fictional objects. This theory of descriptions was crucial to logical atomism, as Russell believed that language mirrored reality.
Russell's principles[edit]
Bertrand Russell's theory of logical atomism consists of three interworking parts: the atomic proposition, the atomic fact, and the atomic complex. An atomic proposition, also known as an elemental judgement, is a fundamental statement describing a single entity. Russell refers to this entity as an atomic fact, and recognizes a range of elements within each fact that he refers to as particulars and universals. A particular denotes a signifier such as a name, many of which may apply to a single atomic fact, while a universal lends quality to these particulars, e.g. color, shape, disposition. In Russell's Theory of Acquaintance, awareness of these particulars and universals comes through sense data. Every system consists of many atomic propositions and their corresponding atomic facts, known together as an atomic complex. In respect to the nomenclature that Russell used for his theory, these complexes are also known as molecular facts in that they possess many atoms. Rather than decoding the complex in a top-down manner, logical atomism analyzes its propositions individually before considering their collective effect. According to Russell, the atomic complex is a product of human thought and ideation that combines the various atomic facts in a logical manner.
Russell's perspective on belief proved a point of contention between him and Wittgenstein, causing it to shift throughout his career. In logical atomism, belief is a complex that possesses both true and untrue propositions. Initially, Russell plotted belief as the special relationship between a subject and a complex proposition. Later, he amended this to say that belief lacks a proposition, and instead associates with universals and particulars directly. Here, the link between psychological experience – sense data – and components of logical atomism – universals and particulars – causes a breach in the typical logic of the theory; Russell’s logical atomism is in some respects defined by the crossover of metaphysics and analytical philosophy, which characterizes the field of naturalized epistemology.[4]
In his theory of Logical Atomism, Russell posited the highly controversial idea that for every positive fact exists a parallel negative fact: a fact that is untrue. The correspondence theory maintains that every atomic proposition coordinates with exactly one atomic fact, and that all atomic facts exist. The Theory of Acquaintance says that for any given statement taking the form of an atomic proposition, we must be familiar with the assertion it makes. For example, in the positive statement, “the leaf is green,” we must be acquainted with the atomic fact that the leaf is green, and we know that this statement corresponds to exactly this one fact. Along this same line, the complementary negative statement, “the leaf is not green," is clearly false given what we know about the color of the leaf, but our ability to form a statement of this nature means that a corresponding fact must exist. Regardless of whether the second statement is or isn't true, the connection between its proposition and a fact must itself be true. One central doctrine of Logical Atomism, known as the Logically Perfect Language Principle, enables this conclusion. This principle establishes that everything exists as atomic proposition and fact, and that all language signifies reality. In Russell’s viewpoint, this necessitates the negative fact, whereas Wittgenstein maintained the more conventional Principle of Bivalence, in which the states "P" and "Not (P)" cannot coexist.
Wittgenstein's principles[edit]
In his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Ludwig Wittgenstein explains his version of logical atomism as the relationship between proposition, state of affairs, object, and complex, often referred to as “Picture theory”.[5] In view of Russell’s version, the propositions are congruent in that they are both not convoluted statements about an atomic entity. Every atomic proposition is constructed from “names” that correspond to “objects”, and the interaction of these objects generate “states of affairs,” which are analogous to what Russell called atomic facts. Where Russell identifies both particulars and universals, Wittgenstein amalgamates these into objects for the sake of protecting the truth-independence of his propositions; a self-contained state of affairs defines each proposition, and the truth of a proposition cannot be proven by the sharing or exclusion of objects between propositions. In Russell’s work, his concept of universals and particulars denies truth-independence, as each universal accounts for a specific set of particulars, and the exact matching of any two sets implies equality, difference implies inequality, and this acts as a qualifier of truth. In Wittgenstein’s theory, an atomic complex is a layered proposition subsuming many atomic propositions, each representing its own state of affairs.
Wittgenstein's handling of belief was dismissive and reflects his abstention from the epistemology that concerned Russell. Because his theory dealt with understanding the nature of reality, and because any item or process of the mind barring positive fact, i.e. something absolute and without interpretation, may become altered and thus divorced from reality, belief exists as a sign of reality but not reality itself. Wittgenstein was decidedly skeptical of epistemology, which tends to value unifying metaphysical ideas while depreciating the casewise and methodological inspection of philosophy that dominates his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.[6] Furthermore, Wittgenstein concerned himself with defining the exact correspondence between language and reality wherein any explanation of reality that defies or overburdens these semantic structures, namely metaphysics, becomes unhinged. Wittgenstein’s work bears the exact philosophical determinants that he openly admonished, hence his later abandonment of this theory altogether.
Differences between Russell's and Wittgenstein's atomism[edit]
At the time Russell delivered his lectures on logical atomism, he had lost contact with Wittgenstein. After World War I, Russell met with Wittgenstein again and helped him publish the Tractatus Logico Philosophicus, Wittgenstein's own version of Logical Atomism.
Although Wittgenstein did not use the expression Logical Atomism, the book espouses most of Russell's logical atomism except for Russell's Theory of Knowledge (T 5.4 and 5.5541). By 1918 Russell had moved away from this position. Nevertheless, the Tractatus differed so fundamentally from the philosophy of Russell that Wittgenstein always believed that Russell misunderstood the work.[citation needed]
The differences relate to many details, but the crucial difference is in a fundamentally different understanding of the task of philosophy. Wittgenstein believed that the task of philosophy was to clean up linguistic mistakes. Russell was ultimately concerned with establishing sound epistemological foundations. Epistemological questions such as how practical knowledge is possible did not interest Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein investigated the "limits of the world" and later on meaning. For Wittgenstein, metaphysics and ethics were nonsensical, though he did not mean to devalue their importance in life by describing them in this way. Russell, on the other hand, believed that these subjects, particularly ethics, though belonging not to philosophy nor science and of possessing an inferior epistemological foundation, were of certain interest.
Influence and decline[edit]
The immediate effect of the Tractatus was enormous, particularly by the reception it received by the Vienna Circle. However, it is now claimed by many contemporary analytic philosophers, that the Vienna Circle misunderstood certain sections of the Tractatus. The indirect effect of the method, however, was perhaps even greater long-term, especially on Logical Positivism. Like Russell, Wittgenstein eventually rejected Logical Atomism. This rejection culminated in the posthumously published book, Philosophical Investigations.
See also[edit]

Logical positivism
Philosophy of language
Logic
Ordinary language philosophy
Theory of descriptions
"On Denoting"

References[edit]



^ Carnap, R. (1934), "On the Character of Philosophic Problems (Über den Charakter der philosophischen Probleme)," translation by W. M. Malisoff, Philosophy of Science, 1, pp. 5–19.
^ a b Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Russell's Logical Atomism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ Russell B., (1944) "My Mental Development", in Schilpp, Paul Arthur: The Philosophy of Betrand Russell, New York, Tudor, 1951, pp. 3–20.
^ Kitchener, Richard F. (2004). "Bertrand Russell's Flirtation with Behaviorism". Behaviorism and Philosophy. 
^ "Wittgenstein, Ludwig | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. Retrieved 2015-12-14. 
^ Temelini, Michael (2015). Wittgenstein and The Study of Politics, Chapter 3 – Wittgenstein's Method of Perspicuous Representation. Toronto/Buffalo/London: University of Toronto Press. pp. 68–94. ISBN 978-1-4426-4633-9.  External link in |title= (help)



External links[edit]

Logical atomism at PhilPapers
Logical atomism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
"Russell's Metaphysics". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Peter Schulte: Bertrand Russell: Philosophie des Logischen Atomismus
Kevin Klement: Russell's Logical Atomism
Ian Proops: Wittgenstein's Logical Atomism
Jeff Speaks: Russell on logical constructions and logical atomism, McGill University 2004
Logical Atomism Overview: [1]
Lecture on Bertrand Russell at Wheaton College: [2]
Lecture on Ludwig Wittgenstein at Wheaton College: [3]







v
t
e


Philosophical logic



Critical thinking and
informal logic



Analysis
Ambiguity
Argument
Belief
Bias
Credibility
Evidence
Explanation
Explanatory power
Fact
Fallacy
Inquiry
Opinion
Parsimony (Occam's razor)
Premise
Propaganda
Prudence
Reasoning
Relevance
Rhetoric
Rigor
Vagueness





Theories of deduction



Constructivism
Dialetheism
Fictionalism
Finitism
Formalism
Intuitionism
Logical atomism
Logicism
Nominalism
Platonic realism
Pragmatism
Realism












v
t
e


Computable knowledge



Topics and
concepts



Alphabet of human thought
Authority control
Automated reasoning
Commonsense knowledge
Commonsense reasoning
Computability
Formal system
Inference engine
Knowledge base
Knowledge-based systems
Knowledge engineering
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge representation
Knowledge retrieval
Library classification
Logic programming
Ontology
Personal knowledge base
Question answering
Semantic reasoner





Proposals and
implementations



Zairja
Ars Magna (1300)
An Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1688)
Calculus ratiocinator and characteristica universalis (1700)
Dewey Decimal Classification (1876)
Begriffsschrift (1879)
Mundaneum (1910)
Logical atomism (1918)
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921)
Hilbert's program (1920s)
Incompleteness theorem (1931)
World Brain (1938)
Memex (1945)
General Problem Solver (1959)
Prolog (1972)
Cyc (1984)
Semantic Web (2001)
Evi (2007)
Wolfram Alpha (2009)
Watson (2011)
Siri (2011)
Knowledge Graph (2012)
Wikidata (2012)
Cortana (2014)
Viv (2016)





In fiction



The Engine (Gulliver's Travels, 1726)
Joe ("A Logic Named Joe", 1946)
The Librarian (Snow Crash, 1992)
Dr. Know (A.I. Artificial Intelligence, 2001)
Waterhouse (The Baroque Cycle, 2003)

See also: Logic machines in fiction and List of fictional computers











v
t
e


Philosophy of language



Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick





Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory





Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...





Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics








Category
Task Force
Discussion












v
t
e


Analytic philosophy



Philosophers



J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Nick Bostrom
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Patricia Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
James F. Conant
Alice Crary
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Cora Diamond
Michael Dummett
Paul Feyerabend
Antony Flew
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
Paul Grice
Ian Hacking
R. M. Hare
Carl Gustav Hempel
Peter van Inwagen
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
Thomas Kuhn
David Lewis
Alasdair MacIntyre
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Ernest Nagel
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
Alvin Plantinga
Karl Popper
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Richard Rorty
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Moritz Schlick
John Searle
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Richard Swinburne
Charles Taylor
Michael Walzer
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein





Theories



Actualism
Analytical feminism
Analytical Marxism
Anti-realism
Berlin Circle
Descriptivist theory of names
Emotivism
Functional contextualism
Linguistic turn
Logical positivism
Modal realism
Model-dependent realism
Neopragmatism
Neurophilosophy
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Pragmatic theory of truth
Verificationism
Vienna Circle





Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal / Deductive / epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation / reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning (Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind / projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid–flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction





Related articles



Aretaic turn
Australian realism
Communitarianism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy








 Index
 Category










Categories: Bertrand RussellTheories of languageTheories of deductionMetaphysical theoriesHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksArticles needing additional references from January 2008All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2011