Teacher education
Teacher education or teacher training refers to the policies, procedures, and provision designed to equip (prospective) teachers with the knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and skills they require to perform their tasks effectively in the classroom, school, and wider community. The professionals who engage in this activity are called teacher educators (or, in some contexts, teacher trainers).
There is a longstanding and ongoing debate about the most appropriate term to describe these activities. The term 'teacher training' (which may give the impression that the activity involves training staff to undertake relatively routine tasks) seems to be losing ground, at least in the U.S., to 'teacher education' (with its connotation of preparing staff for a professional role as a reflective practitioner).[1]



Contents


1 Policy and related issues
2 Continuum

2.1 Initial

2.1.1 Organization
2.1.2 Curriculum
2.1.3 Rural
2.1.4 Supervised field experiences


2.2 Induction of beginning teachers
2.3 Continuous professional development


3 Quality assurance in teacher education
4 Teacher educators

4.1 Professional knowledge and competences of teacher educators

4.1.1 Teacher educators' fields of knowledge
4.1.2 Multiple identities

4.1.2.1 Modelling
4.1.2.2 Meta-reflection




4.2 Professional standards for teacher educators
4.3 Policy and legislation on the teacher educator profession
4.4 Research into the teacher educator profession


5 See also
6 References



Policy and related issues[edit]
The process by which teachers are educated is the subject of political discussion in many countries, reflecting both the value attached by societies and cultures to the preparation of young people for life, and the fact that education systems consume significant financial resources.
However, the degree of political control over Teacher Education varies. Where TE is entirely in the hands of universities, the state may have no direct control whatever over what or how new teachers are taught; this can lead to anomalies, such as teachers being taught using teaching methods that would be deemed inappropriate if they used the same methods in schools, or teachers being taught by persons with little or no hands-on experience of teaching in real classrooms. In other systems, TE may be the subject of detailed prescription (e.g. the state may specify the skills that all teachers must possess, or it may specify the content of TE courses).
Policy cooperation in the European Union has led to a broad description of the kinds of attributes that teachers in EU Member States should possess: the Common European Principle for Teacher Competences and Qualifications.[2]
Continuum[edit]
Although ideally it should be conceived of, and organised as, a seamless continuum, teacher education is often divided into these stages

initial teacher training / education (a pre-service course before entering the classroom as a fully responsible teacher);
induction (the process of providing training and support during the first few years of teaching or the first year in a particular school);
teacher development or continuing professional development (CPD) (an in-service process for practicing teachers).

There is a longstanding and ongoing debate about the most appropriate term to describe these activities. The term 'teacher training' (which may give the impression that the activity involves training staff to undertake relatively routine tasks) seems to be losing ground, at least in the U.S., to 'teacher education' (with its connotation of preparing staff for a professional role as a reflective practitioner).[1]
Initial[edit]
Organization[edit]
In many countries, Initial Teacher Education (also known as preservice teacher training) takes place largely or exclusively in institutions of Higher Education. It may be organized according to two basic models.
In the 'consecutive' model, a teacher first obtains a qualification in one or more subjects (often an undergraduate bachelor's degree), and then studies for a further period to gain an additional qualification in teaching (this may take the form of a post-baccalaureate credential or master's degree).
In the alternative 'concurrent' model, a student simultaneously studies both one or more academic subjects, and the ways of teaching that subject, leading to a combined bachelor's degree and teaching credential to qualify as a teacher of that subject.
Other pathways are also available. In some countries, it is possible for a person to receive training as a teacher by working in a school under the responsibility of an accredited experienced practitioner. In the United Kingdom there is a long tradition of partnerships between universities and schools in providing state supported teacher education.[3] This tradition is not without tensions and controversies.[4]
In the United States, approximately one-third of new teachers come through alternative routes to teacher certification, according to testimony given by Emily Feistritzer, the President of National Center for Alternative Certification and the National Center for Education Information, to a congressional subcommittee on May 17, 2007. However, many alternative pathways are affiliated with schools of education, where candidates still enroll in university-based coursework. A supplemental component of university-based coursework is community-based teacher education, where teacher candidates immerse themselves in communities that will allow them to apply teaching theory to practice. Community-based teacher education also challenges teacher candidates' assumptions about the issues of gender, race, and multicultural diversity.[5]
Curriculum[edit]
The question of what knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and skills teachers should possess is the subject of much debate in many cultures. This is understandable, as teachers are entrusted with the transmission to learners of society's beliefs, attitudes and deontology, as well as of information, advice and wisdom, and with facilitating learners' acquisition of the key knowledge, attitudes and behaviours that they will need to be active in society and the economy.
Generally, Teacher Education curricula can be broken down into four major areas:

foundational knowledge in education-related aspects of philosophy of education, history of education, educational psychology, and sociology of education.
skills in assessing student learning, supporting English Language learners,[dubious – discuss] using technology to improve teaching and learning, and supporting students with special needs.
content-area and methods knowledge and skills—often also including ways of teaching and assessing a specific subject, in which case this area may overlap with the first ("foundational") area. There is increasing debate about this aspect; because it is no longer possible to know in advance what kinds of knowledge and skill pupils will need when they enter adult life, it becomes harder to know what kinds of knowledge and skill teachers should have. Increasingly, emphasis is placed upon 'transversal' or 'horizontal' skills (such as 'learning to learn' or 'social competences'), which cut across traditional subject boundaries, and therefore call into question traditional ways of designing the Teacher Education curriculum (and traditional school curricula and ways of working in the classroom).
practice at classroom teaching or at some other form of educational practice—usually supervised and supported in some way, though not always. Practice can take the form of field observations, student teaching, or (U.S.) internship (See Supervised Field Experiences below).

Rural[edit]
Those training to teach in rural and remote areas face different challenges from those who teach in urban centres[6][7][8]. Therefore, a different approach to teacher education is needed for those who aspire to each in rural and remote areas. It has been proposed that rural and remote communities may have more success recruiting teachers who already live in these communities, rather than trying to recruit urbanites to move to rural communities once they have completed their teacher training[9]. Online and blended teacher education programs are becoming more prevalent to help meet the needs of teacher shortages in rural and remote areas[10][11][12][13]
Supervised field experiences[edit]

field observations—include observation and limited participation within a classroom under the supervision of the classroom teacher
student teaching—includes a number of weeks teaching in an assigned classroom under the supervision of the classroom teacher and a supervisor (e.g. from the university)
internship—teaching candidate is supervised within his or her own classroom

These three areas reflect the organization of most teacher education programs in North America (though not necessarily elsewhere in the world)—courses, modules, and other activities are often organized to belong to one of the three major areas of teacher education. The organization makes the programs more rational or logical in structure. The conventional organization has sometimes also been criticized, however, as artificial and unrepresentative of how teachers actually experience their work. Problems of practice frequently (perhaps usually) concern foundational issues, curriculum, and practical knowledge simultaneously, and separating them during teacher education may therefore not be helpful. However, the question of necessary training components is highly debated as continuing increases in attrition rates by new teachers and struggling learners is evident.[14] Additionally, with the increasing demands of the "teacher" research is beginning to suggest that teachers must not only be trained to increase learning experiences for their students, but how to also be a leader in an increasingly challenging field.[15] The debate of how best to prepare teachers for teaching in today's demanding environments will continue to be an important focus of the United States, where the education of all children successfully is priority.
Induction of beginning teachers[edit]
Teaching involves the use of a wide body of knowledge about the subject being taught, and another set of knowledge about the most effective ways to teach that subject to different kinds of learner; it, therefore, requires teachers to undertake a complex set of tasks every minute. Many teachers experience their first years in the profession as stressful. The proportion of teachers who either do not enter the profession after completing initial training, or who leave the profession after their first teaching post, is high.[16]
A distinction is sometimes made between inducting a teacher into a new school (explaining the school's vision, procedures etc.), and inducting a new teacher into the teaching profession (providing the support necessary to help the beginning teacher develop a professional identity, and to further develop the basic competences that were acquired in college).
A number of countries and states have put in place comprehensive systems of support to help beginning teachers during their first years in the profession. Elements of such a programme can include:

mentoring: the allocation to each beginning teacher of an experienced teacher, specifically trained as a mentor; the mentor may provide emotional and professional support and guidance; in many U.S. states, induction is limited to the provision of a mentor, but research suggests that, in itself, it is not enough.[17]
a peer network: for mutual support but also for peer learning.
input from educational experts (e.g. to help the beginning teacher relate what she learned in college with classroom reality).
support for the process of self-reflection that all teachers engage in (e.g. through the keeping of a journal).

Some research[18] suggests that such programmes can: increase the retention of beginning teachers in the profession; improve teaching performance; promote the teachers' personal and professional well-being.[19]
However, numerous authors [20][21] suggest that current teacher education is highly flawed and primarily geared towards a western dominated curriculum.[22] Hence, they suggest that teacher education should be inclusive and take into account multiple backgrounds and variables to allow teachers to be responsive to the requirements of their students.[20] This falls into the area of culturally responsive teaching and requires teaching education and teachers to address issues of diversity education and disadvantage as a part of a teacher education curriculum. Jabbar & Hardaker (2013) [23] argue that this is an essential process in helping students of ethnicity, colour and diversity achieve and attain.
Continuous professional development[edit]
Because the world that teachers are preparing young people to enter is changing so rapidly, and because the teaching skills required are evolving likewise, no initial course of teacher education can be sufficient to prepare a teacher for a career of 30 or 40 years. In addition, as the student body continues to change due to demographic issues there is a continuous pressure on academics to have mastery of their subjects but also to understand their students.[24][25] Continuous Professional Development (CPD) is the process by which teachers (like other professionals) reflect upon their competencies, keep them up to date, and develop them further.
The extent to which education authorities support this process varies, as does the effectiveness of the different approaches. A growing research base suggests that to be most effective, CPD activities should:

be spread over time,
be collaborative,
use active learning,
be delivered to groups of teachers,
include periods of practice, coaching, and follow-up,
promote reflective practice,[26]
encourage experimentation, and
respond to teachers' needs.[27][28][29]

There are several educations around the world which have been working to improve CPD for teachers. One such organisation is Centre for Teacher Accreditation (CENTA) which has designed teaching standards for different stages in a teacher's career. Further, it conducts a Certification for teachers to engage with them on these standards and recognise those who are outstanding, thereby providing an incentive for CPD.
Quality assurance in teacher education[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The concept of 'Quality' in education is contested and understood in numerous different ways.
It is sometimes taken to relate to the quality of the work undertaken by a teacher, which has significant effects upon his or her pupils or students. Further, those who pay teachers' salaries, whether through taxes or through school fees, wish to be assured that they are receiving value for money. Ways to measure the quality of work of individual teachers, of schools, or of education systems as a whole, are therefore often sought.
In most countries, teacher salary is not related to the perceived quality of his or her work. Some, however, have systems to identify the 'best-performing' teachers, and increase their remuneration accordingly. Elsewhere, assessments of teacher performance may be undertaken with a view to identifying teachers' needs for additional training or development, or, in extreme cases, to identify those teachers that should be required to leave the profession. In some countries, teachers are required to re-apply periodically for their license to teach, and in so doing, to prove that they still have the requisite skills.
Feedback on the performance of teachers is integral to many state and private education procedures, but takes many different forms. The 'no fault' approach is believed by some to be satisfactory, as weaknesses are carefully identified, assessed and then addressed through the provision of in house or school based training. These can, however, be seen as benefiting the institution and not necessarily fully meeting the CPD needs of the individual as they lack educational gravitas.
Teacher educators[edit]

Teacher Educator

Occupation


Names
Teacher Educator, teacher trainer


Profession



Activity sectors

Education


Description


Competencies
Teaching, teaching about teaching, research into learning and teaching,



Education required

varies



Fields of
employment

University Teacher College College of Education School



Related jobs

Professor, academic, lecturer, tutor, teacher


A teacher educator (also called a teacher trainer) is a person who helps other people to acquire the knowledge, competences and attitudes they require to be effective teachers. Several individual teacher educators are usually involved in the initial or ongoing education of each teacher; often each specialises in teaching about a different aspect of teaching (e.g. educational ethics, philosophy of education, sociology of education, curriculum, pedagogy, subject-specific teaching methods etc.).
Not every culture has a concept that precisely matches the English term 'teacher educator'...[30] Even where the concept exists, the range of roles that is covered by the term varies significantly from country to country.[31] In some traditions, the term 'teacher trainer' may be used instead of 'teacher educator'.
A teacher educator may be narrowly defined as a higher education professional whose principle activity is the preparation of beginning teachers in universities and other institutions of teacher education, such as teacher colleges. A broader definition might include any professional whose work contributes in some way to the initial education or the continuing professional development of school and other teachers.[30]
Even within a single educational system, teacher educators may be employed in different roles by different kinds of organisation. In the European context, for example, people who could be considered to be teacher educators include:

-Higher Education academics with a responsibility

--for Teacher Education as such,
--for teaching a subject (such as chemistry or mathematics) to students who will later become teachers;
--for research into teaching,
--for subject studies or
--for didactics;


-teachers in schools who supervise student teachers during periods of teaching practice;
-school teachers or school managers responsible for inducting new teachers during their first year of teaching; or
-those in charge of school teaching staff’s continuous professional development.[32]

Teacher educators may therefore work in many different contexts including (universities, schools, private sector training organisations or trade unions)[32] and their working time may be fully, or only partly, dedicated to the preparation of teachers.
Professional knowledge and competences of teacher educators[edit]
Being able to educate teachers requires different knowledge and skills than those required to teach pupils or students.[33]
Teacher educators' fields of knowledge[edit]
Some recent research has highlighted the many fields of knowledge that are required by teacher educators; these include knowledge about: the pedagogy of teacher education; learning and learners; teaching and coaching; and the profession of teacher educator itself. In addition, teacher educators need to know about the specific contexts their students will work and working in (e.g. for primary, or secondary education) and the subjects they will teach. More experienced teacher educators need expertise in: curriculum development and assessment; the wider context of teacher education, the way it is organised, and in research.[34]
Multiple identities[edit]
The complexity of the tasks of the teacher educator arises in part because, as research has shown, they have multiple professional identities. (This is linked to the issues of definition of the term, highlighted above). While some of those who carry responsibility for the education of teachers do self-identify as 'teacher educator', others may self-identify rather as 'researcher' or 'academic'; others may relate primarily to their academic discipline, such as 'chemist' or 'geographer'[35]
But the key duality of identity that lies at the core of the teacher educator profession is that of first-order and second order teaching. A teacher educator must be a highly competent ‘first-order educator’ (i.e. a good teacher) but also a skilled ‘second-order educator’ (i.e. capable of teaching effectively about the skill of teaching and facilitating others to acquire teaching skills). As first-order educators, they need to be proficient teachers (of 'adult' students). As second-order educators, they require, in addition, specific competences and dispositions, such as modelling and meta-reflection, that enable them to teach about teaching.[33]
The acquisition or improvement of teacher competences requires training, through which it will be improved educational planning and assessment. This results in a better learning of students, as evidences show.[36] It is the objective of FAMT & L Comenius project, conducted at the University of Bologna, designed with the aim of promoting the correct use of formative assessment in mathematics education for students aged from 11 to 16. Reaching this goal supposes to design training programs for teachers of mathematics, starting from identificating their needs, believes, expectations and the use of formative assessment.[37]
Modelling[edit]
The way in which teacher educators teach has a greater impact on student teachers’ thinking about practice than what teacher educators teach.[38] So, teacher educators need to be able to model the competences and attributes they wish their students to adopt.[39] Swennen et al. (2008).[40] concluded that, in order to ‘model’ what they teach, teacher educators need to develop the ability to link their own (tacit) theories and practice of teaching to public theory, i.e., in Korthagen’s [41] words, to translate Theory with a capital ‘T’ to theory with a small ‘t’.
Meta-reflection[edit]
Just as teaching is no longer seen as simply transferring factual information, so educating teachers also requires a more sophisticated approach, based upon professional awareness[42] that comes from reflective practice.[43] For Loughran,[44] being a professional teacher educator requires “genuinely reflecting on, and responding to, the needs, demands, and expectations of teaching about teaching within the academy”.
Professional standards for teacher educators[edit]
In some parts of the world (notably the USA, the Netherlands, and Flanders) specific standards of professional practice have been developed for, or by, teacher educators. These set out the range of competences that a member of the teacher educator profession is expected to be able to deploy, as well as the attitudes, values and behaviours that are deemed to be acceptable for membership of the profession.)[45]
Policy and legislation on the teacher educator profession[edit]
While schools and school teachers are often in the news and in political debate, research shows that the teacher educator profession is largely absent from such public discussions and from policy discourse in Education [46] which often focuses exclusively on teachers and school leaders.
Some research suggests that, while most countries have policies, and legislation, in place concerning the teaching profession, few countries have a clear policy or strategy on the teacher educator profession. Caena (2012) [47] found that some of the consequences of this situation can include a teacher educator profession that is poorly organised, has low status or low formal recognition, has few regulations, professional standards - or even minimum qualifications, and no coherent approach to the selection, induction, or continuing professional development of Teacher Educators.
Research into the teacher educator profession[edit]
The teacher educator profession has also been seen as under-researched;[48] empirical research on professional practice is also scarce.[49]
However, the importance of the quality of this profession for the quality of teaching and learning has been underlined by international bodies including the OECD and the European Commission [50]
Some writers have therefore identified a need for more research into “what teachers of teachers themselves need to know”, and what institutional supports are needed to “meet the complex demands of preparing teachers for the 21st century”[51]
In response to this perceived need, more research projects are now focussing on the teacher educator profession.[52] Several academic journals cover this field.
See also[edit]

Gender mainstreaming in teacher education policy
Normal school
Pedagogy
School of education

References[edit]


^ a b see for example Cecil H. Allen, In-Service Training of Teachers in Review of Educational Research. 1940; 10: 210–215. In the UK, however, the term 'teacher training' is still in general use: see for instance the UK government's information on tda.gov.uk
^ http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/2010/doc/principles_en.pdf
^ BERA/RSA (2014). RESEARCH AND THE TEACHING PROFESSION. Building the capacity for a self-improving education system. London: BERA. ISBN 978-0-946671-37-3. 
^ Oancea, Alis (2014). "Teachers' professional knowledge and state-funded teacher education: a (hi)story of critiques and silences". Oxford Review of Education. 40: 497–519. 
^ U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Education and Labor website. Accessed on December 7, 2009.
^ Eaton, S. E., Dressler, R., Gereluk, D., & Becker, S. (2015). A review of the literature on rural and remote pre-service teacher preparation with a focus on blended and e-learning models. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1880/50497 doi:10.13140/RG.2.1.1644.4882
^ Gibson, I. W. (1994). Policy, practice and need in the professional preparation of teachers for rural teaching. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 10(1), 68-77. 
^ Alberta Advanced Education. (2005). A Learning Alberta: Advanced Education in Rural Alberta: Challenges And Opportunities: A Discussion Document. Edmonton: Alberta Advanced Education Retrieved from http://eae.alberta.ca/media/134955/rural.pdf.
^ Northern Alberta Development Council. (2010). Rural and Remote Education Report. Retrieved from www.nadc.gov.ab.ca/Docs/rural-remote-education.pdf 
^ Eaton, S. E., Gereluk, D., Dressler, R., & Becker, S. (2017). A Canadian online rural education teacher preparation program: Course design, student support and engagement. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Conference, San Antonio, TX, USA. http://hdl.handle.net/1880/51973
^ West, E., & Jones, P. (2007). A Framework for Planning Technology Used in Teacher Education Programs That Serve Rural Communities. Rural Special Education Quarterly, 26(4). 
^ Weitzenkamp, D. J., Howe, M. E., Steckelberg, A. L., & Radcliffe, R. (2003). The GOALS model: Rural teacher preparation institutions meeting the ideals of a PDS through educational technology. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 2(4). Retrieved from http://www.citejournal.org/vol2/iss4/currentpractice/article1.cfm
^ Winstead Fry, S. (2006). A technology supported induction network for rural student teachers. Retrieved from http://www.ruralteachers.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/a-technology-supported-induction-netwrok-for-rural-student-teachers.pdf
^ Rosser-Cox, Michelle (2011). CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS AND MOTIVATION IN PREPARING TEACHERS: PRE-SERVICE TEACHERS: DOES CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS AFFECT ANTICIPATED SELF-DETERMINATION TO TEACH IN SPECIFIC SETTINGS?. LAMBERT Academic Publishing. p. 172. ISBN 3844384693. 
^ Rosser and Massey (2013). Educational Leadership: The Power of Oneself. Peter Lang. 
^ Richard, Ingersoll,; M, Smith, Thomas (1 January 2004). "Do Teacher Induction and Mentoring Matter?". 
^ Wong H; Induction programs that keep new teachers teaching and improving; NASSP Bulletin � Vol. 88 No. 638 March 2004
^ Ashby, P., Hobson, A., Tracey, L., Malderez, A., Tomlinson, P., Roper, T., Chambers, G. and Healy, J. (2008). Beginner teachers' experiences of initial teacher preparation, induction and early professional development: a review of literature. London: DCSF
^ Huling-Austin, J. A synthesis of research on teacher induction programs and practices; paper presented to the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans LA, April 5–9, 1988
^ a b Villegas, A.; Lucas, T. (2002). "Preparing culturally responsive teachers rethinking the curriculum". Journal of Teacher Education. 53 (1): 20–32. doi:10.1177/0022487102053001003. 
^ Jabbar, Abdul and Hardaker, Glenn (2013) The role of culturally responsive teaching for supporting ethnic diversity in British University Business Schools. Teaching in Higher Education , 18 (3). pp. 272-284.
^ Turner, Y (2006). "Chinese Students in a UK Business School: Hearing the Student Voice in Reflective Teaching and Learning Practice". Higher Education Quarterly. 60 (1): 27–51. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2273.2006.00306.x. 
^ Jabbar, Abdul; Hardaker, Glenn (2013). "The role of culturally responsive teaching for supporting ethnic diversity in British University Business Schools". Teaching in Higher Education. 18 (3): 272–284. doi:10.1080/13562517.2012.725221. 
^ Howard, T. C. (2003). "Culturally Relevant Pedagogy: Ingredients for Critical Teacher Reflection". Theory into Practice. 42 (3): 195–202. doi:10.1207/s15430421tip4203_5. 
^ Jabbar, Abdul; Hardaker, Glenn (2013). "The role of culturally responsive teaching for supporting ethnic diversity in British University Business Schools". Teaching in Higher Education. 18 (3): 272–284. doi:10.1080/13562517.2012.725221. 
^ "Theatre of the Oppressed in Education - Centre for Community Dialogue and Change". 
^ see: Snow-Renner and Lauer, ‘Professional Development Analysis (synthesis of 54 studies), McREL, 2005
^ Garet, See; Porter, Desmoine; Birman, Kwang (2001). "What makes professional development effective?". American Education Research Journal. 38 (4): 915–946. doi:10.3102/00028312038004915. 
^ see General Teaching Council for England, 'Teachers' Professional Learning', London, 2005.
^ a b Francesca Caena: Perspectives on Teacher Educator policies in European countries: an overview. Retrieved January 2017 at http://www.lerarenopleider.nl/velon/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/summary_national_situations_teacher_educator_policies_europe.pdf
^ see, for example, the analysis of how this term is used within Europe in: European Commission (2012), 'Supporting the Teaching Professions for Better Learning Outcomes' retrieved January 2017 at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=SWD:2012:0374:FIN:EN:PDF
^ a b these examples are taken from the European Commission's text 'Supporting teacher educators' retrieved January 2017 from [1]
^ a b Murray, J., Male, T. (2005) ‘Becoming a teacher educator: evidence from the field’ Teaching and Teacher Education 21 125–142[000]
^ These are taken from: Dengerink J, Lunenberg M and Kools Q (2015) ‘What and how teacher educators prefer to learn’, Journal of Education for Teaching, 41:1, 78-96; but see also a similar list of required competences in European Commission (2012), 'Supporting the Teaching Professions for Better Learning Outcomes' retrieved January 2017 at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=SWD:2012:0374:FIN:EN:PDF
^ see, for example: Swennen A., Jones K, Volman M (2010). ‘Teacher Educators: their identities, sub-identities and implications for professional development’, Professional Development in Education, 36 (1-2), March- June 2010, 131-148.
^ Ferretti & Lovece (2015). "LA VALUTAZIONE FORMATIVA PER LA DIDATTICA DELLA MATEMATICA NELL'AMBITO DEL PROGETTO FAMT&L. LE CONCEZIONI DEGLI STUDENTI DI SCUOLA MEDIA NEI CONFRONTI DEGLI STRUMENTI DI VERIFICA UTILIZZATI IN CLASSE". Journal of Theories and Research in Education. 10 (2). 
^ "Improvement of teachers' competences. [Social Impact]. FAMT&L. Formative Assessment for Mathematics' Teaching and Learning (2013-2016)". SIOR, Social Impact Open Repository. 
^ Russell, 1997 cited in Loughran J. and Berry A.: ‘Modelling by teacher educators’, Teaching and Teacher Education 21 (2005) 193–203
^ Loughran and Berry 2005; Lunenberg M., Korthagen F. and Swennen A. (2007): ‘The teacher educator as a role model’, Teaching and Teacher Education 23 586–601; Davey, R. and Ham, V. (2011), ‘ ‘It’s all about paying attention!’ … but to what?’ in Bates et al.: ‘The Professional Development of teacher educators’, Routledge, London, 2011; pp 232-247
^ Swennen, A., Lunenberg, M. and Korthagen, F. (2008): ‘Preach what you teach! Teacher educators and congruent teaching’, Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 14(5), 531–542
^ Korthagen FAJ, (2001), ‘Linking practice and theory: The pedagogy of realistic teacher education’. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,Inc.
^ see, for example: Yaffe E. and Maskit D, ‘Discussing pedagogical dilemmas with teacher educators …’ In Bates et al 'The Professional Development of teacher educators', Routledge, London, 2011
^ see for example Ken Zeichner 'Becoming a teacher educator: a personal perspective;'Teaching and Teacher Education 21 (2005) 117–124
^ Loughran J (2014) ‘Professionally Developing as a Teacher Educator’; Journal of Teacher Education 2014, Vol. 65(4) 271–283(2014)
^ See examples from USA: http://www.ate1.org/pubs/uploads/tchredstds0308.pdf and the Netherlands: http://www.lerarenopleider.nl/velon/beroepsstandaard/
^ Snoek, Swennen, vanderKlink (2009). "The teacher educator: A Neglected Factor in the Contemporary Debate on Teacher Education,". Advancing quality cultures for teacher education in Europe: tensions and opportunities. Umea University.: 288–299. 
^ Caena F (2012) ‘Perspectives on Teacher Educator policies in European countries: an overview’ paper prepared for the European Commission conference ‘Education²: Policy support for Teacher Educators’; downloaded August 2013 at http://ec.europa.eu/education/school-education/teacher-educator_en.htm
^ Murray J, Male T (2005). "Becoming a teacher educator: evidence from the field". Teaching and Teacher Education. 21: 125–142. 
^ Willemse M, Lunenberg M, Korthagen F (2005). "'Values in education: a challenge for teacher educators'". Teaching and Teacher Education. 21: 205–217. 
^ see, for example: European Commission (2012), 'Supporting the Teaching Professions for Better Learning Outcomes' retrieved January 2017 at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=SWD:2012:0374:FIN:EN:PDF
^ Cochran-Smith M (2003): ‘Learning and unlearning: the education of teacher educators’, Teaching and Teacher Education 19 (2003) 5–28)
^ For one example, see the InfoTED project at https://www.ntnu.edu/info-ted








v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla  (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject










Categories: Teacher trainingHidden categories: All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from November 2015Articles needing additional references from January 2015All articles needing additional references