Video game art
This article is about creating art from existing video games, and does not deal with game art development, art games, or video games as an art form.
For other uses, see Art game (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs attention from an expert on the subject. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article.
When placing this tag, consider associating this request with a WikiProject. (April 2010)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section follows Wikipedia's norms and to be inclusive of all essential details. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Art and video games


 




Video games as an art form


Video games as an art form
Arthouse game
The Art of Video Games (exhibition)
Alternate reality game








Artistic expression within video games


Video game art
Non-game
Machinima
Interactive movie








Video game art creation


Game art design
Video game graphics
Video game music
Storytelling
Pixel art
Video game artists









v
t
e





Video game art is a specialized form of computer art employing video games as the artistic medium. Video game art often involves the use of patched or modified video games or the repurposing of existing games or game structures, however it relies on a broader range of artistic techniques and outcomes than artistic modification and it may also include painting, sculpture, appropriation, in-game intervention and performance, sampling, etc.[1][2][citation needed] It may also include the creation of art games either from scratch or by modifying existing games. Notable examples of video game art include Cory Arcangel's "Super Mario Clouds" and "I Shot Andy Warhol,"[3] Joseph Delappe's projects including "Dead in Iraq" and the "Salt Satyagraha Online: Gandhi's March to Dandi in Second Life,"[4][5] the 2004-2005 Rhizome Commissions "relating to the theme of games,"[6] Paolo Pedercini's Molleindustria games such as "Unmanned" and "Every Day the Same Dream", and Ian Bogost's "Cowclicker."
Artistic modifications are frequently made possible through the use of level editors, though other techniques exist. Some artists make use of machinima applications to produce non-interactive animated artworks, however artistic modification is not synonymous with machinima as these form only a small proportion of artistic modifications.[citation needed] Machinima is distinct from art mods as it relies on different tools, though there are many similarities with some art mods.[citation needed]
Like video games, artistic game modifications are often interactive and may allow for single-player or multiplayer experience. Multiplayer works make use of networked environments to develop new kinds of interaction and collaborative art production.



Contents


1 Techniques

1.1 Machinima
1.2 In-game intervention and performance
1.3 Site-specific installations and site-relative mods
1.4 Real-time performance instruments
1.5 Generative art mods


2 See also
3 Notes
4 References
5 External links



Techniques[edit]
Machinima[edit]


Play media


Machinima filmed in Second life


Main article: Machinima
Machinima is the use of real-time three-dimensional (3-D) graphics rendering engines to generate computer animation. The term also refers to works that incorporate this animation technique.
In-game intervention and performance[edit]
Artists may intervene in online games in a non-play manner, often disrupting games in progress in order to challenge or expose underlying conventions and functions of game play. Examples of this include Anne Marie Schleiner's Velvet-Strike (a project designed to allow players of realistic first person shooter games to use anti-war graffiti within the game to make an artistic statement[7]) and Dead in Iraq (an art project created by Joseph DeLappe in which the player character purposely allows himself to be shot and then recites the names of US soldiers who have died in the Iraq War[8]).
Site-specific installations and site-relative mods[edit]
Site-specific installations and site-relative gaming modifications ("mods"), replicate real-world places (often the art gallery in which they are displayed) to explore similarities and differences between real and virtual worlds. An example is What It Is Without the Hand That Wields It, where blood from kills in Counterstrike manifests and spills into a real life gallery.[9]
Real-time performance instruments[edit]
Video games can be incorporated into live audio and visual performance using a variety of instruments and computers such as keyboards embedded with music chips.[citation needed] See also chiptune and the Fijuu project.[10]
Generative art mods[edit]
Generative art mods exploit the real-time capabilities of game technologies to produce ever-renewing autonomous artworks.[citation needed] Examples include Julian Oliver's ioq3apaint, a generative painting system that uses the actions of software agents in combat to drive the painting process,[11][12] Alison Mealy's UnrealArt which takes the movements of game entities and uses them to control a drawing process in an external program,[13][14] Kent Sheely's "Cities in Flux," a Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas mod that glitches and distorts the game's world in real-time,[15] and RetroYou's R/C Racer a modification of the graphic elements of a racing game which results in rich fields of colour and shape.[16][17]
See also[edit]

Art game
Demoscene
Digital art
Electronic art
Electronic Language International Festival
Game Masters
Game studies
Interactive art
Internet art
In-game photography
Mod (video gaming)
Modding
Software art
Video games as an art form
Virtual art

Notes[edit]


^ John., Sharp, (2016-01-01). Works of Game. The MIT Press. ISBN 9780262029070. OCLC 936302522. 
^ Andy,, Clarke,; Grethe,, Mitchell, (2013-01-01). Videogames and Art. Intellect. ISBN 9781841504193. OCLC 876434897. 
^ Andy Clarke and Grethe Mitchell (eds.),Videogames and Art (Intellect Books, 2006).
^ Mail Away: War Correspondence at Home and Away, by Lindsay Kelley, in the Media-N Journal of the New Media Caucus "Archived copy". Archived from the original on May 18, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2013. 
^ The Salt Satyahgraha by Joseph Delappe - review by Natasha Chuk, in Furtherfield http://www.furtherfield.org/netbehaviour/salt-satyagraha-joseph-delappe-review-natasha-chuk
^ Rhizome Commissions http://rhizome.org/commissions/
^ "Velvet-Strike". Opensorcery.net. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on December 6, 2006. Retrieved December 5, 2006. 
^ 8/23/06 4:15pm 8/23/06 4:15pm. "People Actually Lamer Than Stuart Scott Rip On Stuart Scott". Kotaku.com. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved December 5, 2007. 
^ Oliver, Julian. "Julian Oliver". Julian Oliver. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ [1] Archived May 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ 風紀委員 posted by alisonmealey.com on 2014年2月20日. "色々な風俗がありますが全部が魅力的すぎます". Alisonmealey.com. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ "will be back online soon". Unreal Art. 2014-01-16. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ "Viewer-generated screenshots: "Cities in Flux" – D-Pad Toronto 2012 // kent sheely". Kentsheely.com. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ "full void". Retroyou.org. Retrieved 2014-03-07. 
^ [2] Archived June 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.


References[edit]

GameScenes: Art in the Age of Videogames. (Johan & Levi, 2006). Edited by Matteo Bittanti and Domenico Quaranta.
Introduction to artistic computer game modification by Rebecca Cannon (PDF file) Backed up here [3] by Rebecca Cannon (PDF file) Backed up here [4].
Videogames and Art by Andy Clarke and Grethe Mitchell (eds.)
Journal of Media Practice vol 7, no. 1 (special edition on videogames and art) by Andy Clarke and Grethe Mitchell (eds.)
Switch, Art & Games issue, 1999, online magazine of the CADRE Laboratory for New Media, San Jose State University
From "First-Person Shooter" to Multi-User Knowledge Spaces Mathias Fuchs and Sylvia Eckermann
Konsum Art-Server nTRACKER Margarete Jahrmann and Max Moswitzer
Messages For A First Person Perspective Maia Engeli
Smuts, Aaron (2005). "Are Video Games Art?". 

External links[edit]

Art games archive with examples of artistic modifications
Art games website with various examples of artistic modifications
Art games archive with examples of artistic modifications







v
t
e


Art movements



Medieval



Early Christian
Migration Period
Anglo-Saxon
Visigothic
Pre-Romanesque
Insular
Viking
Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Norman-Sicilian
Gothic (International Gothic)





Renaissance



Italian Renaissance
Early Netherlandish
German Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerists
Danube school
High Renaissance
Romanism
Mannerism
Fontainebleau
Northern Mannerism
Flemish Baroque





17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age





18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism





19th century



Naïve
Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School





20th century



Arts and Crafts
Fauvism
Die Brücke
Cubism
Expressionism
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Der Blaue Reiter
Orphism
Synchromism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Ashcan
Dada
De Stijl
Purism
Bauhaus
Kinetic art
New Objectivity
Neues Sehen
Surrealism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Scuola Romana
Art Deco
International Typographic Style
Social realism
Abstract expressionism
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Color Field
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
New media art
Letterist International
Pop art
Situationist International
Lettrism
Neo-Dada
Op art
Nouveau réalisme
Art & Language
Conceptual art
Land art
Systems art
Video art
Minimalism
Fluxus
Photorealism
Performance art
Installation art
Endurance art
Outsider art
Neo-expressionism
Lowbrow
Young British Artists
Amazonian pop art





21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art





Related articles



List of art movements
Feminist art movement (in the US)
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde










Categories: Art genresDigital artWorks based on video gamesModern artVideo game artHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameterArticles needing unspecified expert attentionArticles needing expert attention from April 2010All articles needing expert attentionArticles that may contain original research from April 2010All articles that may contain original researchArticles needing additional references from February 2012All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia introduction cleanup from March 2013All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2013All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010