Affective science
Affective science is the scientific study of emotion or affect. This includes the study of emotion elicitation, emotional experience and the recognition of emotions in others. In particular the nature of feeling, mood, emotionally driven behaviour, decision making, attention and self-regulation, as well as the underlying physiology and neuroscience of the emotions.



Contents


1 Discussion
2 Measuring emotions

2.1 Affective display


3 At Stanford
4 See also
5 Notes and references



Discussion[edit]
An increasing interest in emotion can be seen in the behavioral, biological and social sciences. Research over the last two decades suggests that many phenomena, ranging from individual cognitive processing to social and collective behavior, cannot be understood without taking into account affective determinants (i.e. motives, attitudes, moods, and emotions).[1] Just as the "cognitive revolution" of the 60s spawned the "cognitive sciences" and linked the disciplines studying cognitive functioning from different vantage points, the emerging field of affective science seeks to bring together the disciplines which study the biological, psychological, and social dimensions of affect. In particular affective science includes psychology, neuroscience, sociology, psychiatry, anthropology, ethology, archaeology, economics, criminology, law, political science, history, geography, education and linguistics. Research is also informed by contemporary philosophical analysis and artistic explorations of emotions. Emotions developed in human history make organisms to react to environmental stimuli and challenges.[2]
The major challenge for this interdisciplinary domain is to integrate research focusing on the same phenomenon, emotion and similar affective processes, starting from different perspectives, theoretical backgrounds, and levels of analysis. As a result, one of the first challenges of affective science is to reach consensus on the definition of emotions. Discussion is still ongoing as to whether emotions are primarily bodily responses or whether cognitive processing should be placed central. Controversy also concerns the most effective ways to measure emotions and conceptualise how one emotion can differ from another. Examples of this include the dimensional models of Russell and others, the emotion wheel of Plutchik, and the general distinction between basic and complex emotions.[3]
Measuring emotions[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Whether scientific method is at all suited for the study of the subjective aspect of emotion, feelings, is a question for philosophy of science and epistemology. In practice, the use of self-report (i.e. questionnaires) has been widely adopted by researchers. Additionally, web-based research is being used to conduct large-scale studies on the components of happiness for example. (www.authentichappiness.com is a website run by the University of Pennsylvania, where questionnaires are routinely taken by thousands of people all over the world based on a well-being criteria devised in the book 'Flourish.' by Martin Seligman.[4]) Nevertheless, Seligman mentions in the book the poor reliability of using this method as it is often entirely subjective to how the individual is feeling at the time, as opposed to questionnaires which test for more long standing personal features that contribute to well-being such as meaning in life. Alongside this researchers also use fMRI, EEG and physiological measures of skin conductance, muscle tension and hormone secretion. This hybrid approach should allow researchers to gradually pinpoint the affective phenomenon. There are also a few commercial systems available that claim to measure emotions, for instance using automated video analysis (nViso) or skin conductance (Affectiva).
Affective display[edit]
Main article: Affect display
A common way to measure the emotions of others is via their emotional expressions. These include facial expression, vocal expression and bodily posture. Much work has also gone into coding expressive behaviour computer programmes that can be used to read the subject's emotion more reliably. The model used for facial expression is the Facial Action Coding System or 'FACS'. An influential figure in the development of this system was Paul Ekman. For criticism, see the conceptual-act model of emotion.
These behavioural sources can be contrasted with language descriptive of emotions. In both respects one may observe the way that affective display differs from culture to culture.
At Stanford[edit]
The Stanford University Psychology Department has an Affective Science area. It emphasizes basic research on emotion, culture, and psychopathology using a broad range of experimental, psychophysiological, neural, and genetic methods to test theory about psychological mechanisms underlying human behavior. Topics include longevity, culture and emotion, reward processing, depression, social anxiety, risk for psychopathology, and emotion expression, suppression, and (dys)regulation.[5]
See also[edit]


Psychology portal



Emotion
Music therapy
Psychology
Affective neuroscience
Affective computing

Notes and references[edit]


^ The National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) for the Affective Sciences Archived May 3, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. See also Swiss Center for Affective Sciences; Seidner identified a negative affect arousal mechanism regarding the devaluation of speakers from other ethnic origins. See Stanley S. Seidner [1991] Negative Affect Arousal Reactions from Mexican and Puerto Rican Respondents http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED346711&ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=no&accno=ED346711
^ Ann M.Kring and Erin K.Moran. Emotional Response Deficits in Schizophrenia: Insights From Affective Science. (2008)
^ "Research - Lisa Feldman Barrett - Interdisciplinary Affective Science Laboratory - Northeastern University". affective-science.org. Retrieved 2016-07-27. 
^ "Flourish: A New Understanding of Happiness and Well-Being — and How to Achieve Them by Martin Seligman — review | Science | The Guardian". theguardian.com. Retrieved 2016-07-27. 
^ "Affective Science | Department of Psychology". psychology.stanford.edu. Retrieved 2016-07-27. 








v
t
e


Emotions (list)



Emotions



Adoration
Affection
Agitation
Agony
Amusement
Anger
Anguish
Annoyance
Anxiety
Apathy
Arousal
Attraction
Awe
Boredom
Calmness
Compassion
Contempt
Contentment
Defeat
Depression
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Ecstasy
Embarrassment

Vicarious


Empathy
Enthrallment
Enthusiasm
Envy
Euphoria
Excitement
Fear
Frustration
Gratitude
Grief
Guilt
Happiness
Hatred
Homesickness
Hope
Horror
Hostility
Humiliation
Hysteria
Infatuation
Insecurity
Insult
Interest
Irritation
Isolation
Jealousy
Joy
Loneliness
Longing
Love
Lust
Melancholy
Mono no aware
Neglect
Nostalgia
Panic
Passion
Pity
Pleasure
Pride

hubris


Rage
Regret
Rejection
Remorse
Resentment
Sadness
Saudade
Schadenfreude
Sehnsucht
Sentimentality
Shame
Shock
Shyness
Sorrow
Spite
Stress
Suffering
Surprise
Sympathy
Tenseness
Wonder
Worry








World views



Cynicism
Defeatism
Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz










Categories: NeuropsychologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional references