Educational sciences






It has been suggested that this article be merged into Education sciences. (Discuss) Proposed since December 2017.



Education sciences (traditionally often called pedagogy)[1][2] and education theory seek to describe, understand, and prescribe educational policy and practice. Education sciences include many topics, such as pedagogy, andragogy, curriculum, learning, and education policy, organization and leadership. Educational thought is informed by many disciplines, such as history, philosophy, sociology, and psychology.
Faculties, departments, degree programs, and degrees on educational sciences are often called simply Faculty of Education etc.[3] It is likewise common, especially in North America, to say she is studying education, which is generally called studying educational science(s) nowadays and was traditionally called studying pedagogy (in English) in most European countries.
For example, a cultural theory of education considers how education occurs through the totality of culture, including prisons, households, and religious institutions as well as schools.[4][5] Other examples are the behaviorist theory of education that comes from educational psychology and the functionalist theory of education that comes from sociology of education.[6]
The earliest known attempts to understand education in Europe were by classical Greek philosophers and sophists, but there is also evidence of contemporary (or even preceding) discussions among Arabic, Indian, and Chinese scholars.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Educational thought
2 Normative theories of education

2.1 Educational philosophies
2.2 Curriculum theory
2.3 Feminist educational theory

2.3.1 Background
2.3.2 Opposition
2.3.3 Support




3 Descriptive theories of education

3.1 Curriculum theory
3.2 Instructional theory
3.3 The nature of the learner and of learning
3.4 Sociology of education
3.5 Educational anthropology


4 Educational Theorists
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Educational thought[edit]
See also: Philosophy of education and History of Education
Educational thought is not necessarily concerned with the construction of theories as much as the "reflective examination of educational issues and problems from the perspective of diverse disciplines."[7]
Normative theories of education[edit]
Normative theories of education provide the norms, goals, and standards of education.[8]
Educational philosophies[edit]
Main article: Philosophy of education
"Normative philosophies or theories of education may make use of the results of [philosophical thought] and of factual inquiries about human beings and the psychology of learning, but in any case they propound views about what education should be, what dispositions it should cultivate, why it ought to cultivate them, how and in whom it should do so, and what forms it should take. In a full-fledged philosophical normative theory of education, besides analysis of the sorts described, there will normally be propositions of the following kinds: 1. Basic normative premises about what is good or right; 2. Basic factual premises about humanity and the world; 3. Conclusions, based on these two kinds of premises, about the dispositions education should foster; 4. Further factual premises about such things as the psychology of learning and methods of teaching; and 5. Further conclusions about such things as the methods that education should use."[9]
Examples of the purpose of schools include:[10] to develop reasoning about perennial questions, to master the methods of scientific inquiry, to cultivate the intellect, to create change agents, to develop spirituality, and to model a democratic society.[11]
Common educational philosophies include: educational perennialism, educational progressivism, educational essentialism, critical pedagogy, Montessori education, Waldorf education, and democratic education.
Curriculum theory[edit]
Main article: Curriculum theory
Normative theories of curriculum aim to "describe, or set norms, for conditions surrounding many of the concepts and constructs" that define curriculum.[12] These normative propositions differ from those above in that normative curriculum theory is not necessarily untestable.[12] A central question asked by normative curriculum theory is: given a particular educational philosophy, what is worth knowing and why? Some examples are: a deep understanding of the Great Books, direct experiences driven by student interest, a superficial understanding of a wide range knowledge (e.g. Core knowledge), social and community problems and issues, knowledge and understanding specific to cultures and their achievements (e.g. African-Centered Education).
Feminist educational theory[edit]
Background[edit]
Scholars such as Robyn Wiegman argue that, “academic feminism is perhaps the most successful institutionalizing project of its generation, with more full-time faculty positions and new doctoral degree programs emerging each year in the field it inaugurated, Women's Studies”.[13] Feminist educational theory stems from four key tenets, supported by empirical data based on surveys of feminist educators.[14] The first tenet of feminist educational theory is, “Creation of participatory classroom communities”.[14] Participatory classroom communities often are smaller classes built around discussion and student involvement. The second tenet is, “Validation of personal experience”.[14] Classrooms in which validation of personal experience occur often are focused around students providing their own insights and experiences in group discussion, rather than relying exclusively on the insight of the educator. The third tenet is, “Encouragement of social understanding and activism”.[14] This tenet is generally actualized by classrooms discussing and reading about social and societal aspects that students may not be aware of, along with breeding student self-efficacy. The fourth and final tenet of feminist education is, “Development of critical thinking skills/open-mindedness”.[14] Classrooms actively engaging in this tenet encourage students to think for themselves and prompt them to move beyond their comfort zones, working outside the bounds of the traditional lecture-based classroom. Though these tenets at times overlap, they combine to provide the basis for modern feminist educational theory, and are supported by a majority of feminist educators.[14]
Feminist educational theory derives from the feminist movement, particularly that of the early 1970s, which prominent feminist bell hooks describes as, “a movement to end sexism, sexist exploitation, and oppression”.[15] Academic feminist Robyn Weigman recalls that, “In the early seventies, feminism in the U.S. academy was less an organized entity than a set of practices: an ensemble of courses listed on bulletin boards often taught for free by faculty and community leaders”.[13] While feminism traditionally existed outside of the institutionalization of schools (particularly universities), feminist education has gradually taken hold in the last few decades and has gained a foothold in institutionalized educational bodies. “Once fledgling programs have become departments, and faculty have been hired and tenured with full-time commitments”.[13]
Opposition[edit]
Opposition to feminist educational theory comes from both those who oppose feminism in general and feminists who oppose feminist educational theory in particular. Critics of feminist educational theory argue against the four basic tenets of the theory, “… [contesting] both their legitimacy and their implementation”.[14] Lewis Lehrman particularly describes feminist educational ideology as, “… 'therapeutic pedagogy' that substitutes an 'overriding' (and detrimental) value on participatory interaction for the expertise of the faculty” (Hoffman). Lehrman argues that the feminist educational tenets of participatory experience and validation of person experience hinder education by limiting and inhibiting the educator’s ability to share his or her knowledge, learned through years of education and experience.
Others challenge the legitimacy of feminist educational theory, arguing that it is not unique and is instead a sect of liberatory education. Even feminist educational scholars such as Frances Hoffmann and Jayne Stake are forced to concede that, “feminist pedagogy shared intellectual and political roots with the movements comprising the liberatory education agenda of the past 30 years”.[14] These liberatory attempts at the democratization of classrooms demonstrate a growth in liberatory education philosophy that some argue feminist educational theory simply piggybacks off of.
The harshest critiques of feminist educational theory often come from feminists themselves. Feminist scholar Robyn Wiegman argues against feminist education in her article “Academic Feminism against Itself,” arguing that feminist educational ideology has abandoned the intersectionality of feminism in many cases, and has also focused exclusively on present content with a singular perspective. Wiegman refers to feminist scholar James Newman's arguments, centered around the idea that, “When we fail… to challenge both students and ourselves to theorize alterity as an issue of change over time as well as of geographic distance, ethnic difference, and sexual choice, we repress… not only the ‘thickness’ of historical difference itself, but also… our (self) implication in a narrative of progress whose hero(in)es inhabit only the present”.[13] Newman (and Wiegman) believe that this presentist ideology imbued within modern academic feminism creates an environment breeding antifeminist ideologies, most importantly an abandonment of the study of difference, integral to feminist ideology. Wiegman believes that feminist educational theory does a great disservice to the feminist movement, while failing to instill the critical thinking and social awareness that feminist educational theory is intended to.
Support[edit]
There are countless supporters of feminist education as well, many of whom are educators or students. Student-turned-professor Becky Ropers-Huilman recounts one of her positive experiences with feminist education from the student perspective, explaining that she “… felt very ‘in charge’ of [her] own learning experiences,” and “… was not being graded-or degraded... [while completing] the majority of the assigned work for the class (and additional work that [she] thought would add to class discussion),” all while “… [regarding] the teacher’s feedback on [her] participation as one perspective, rather than the perspective”.[16] Ropers experienced a working feminist classroom that successfully motivated students to go above and beyond, succeeding in generating self-efficacy and caring in the classroom. When Ropers became a teacher herself, she embraced feminist educational theory, noting that, “[Teachers] have an obligation as the ones who are vested with an assumed power, even if that power is easily and regularly disrupted, to assess and address the effects that it is having in our classrooms”.[16] Ropers firmly believes that educators have a duty to address feminist concepts such as the use and flow of power within the classroom, and strongly believes in the potential of feminist educational theory to create positive learning experiences for students and teachers as she has personally experienced.
Becky Ropers-Huilman also celebrates the feminist classroom’s inclusivity, noting that in a feminist classroom, “in which power is used to care about, for, and with others… educational participants can shape practices aimed at creating an inclusive society that discovers and utilizes the potential of its actors”.[16] Ropers believes that a feminist classroom carries the ability to greatly influence the society as a whole, promoting understanding, caring, and inclusivity. Ropers actively engages in feminist education in her classes, focusing on concepts such as active learning and critical thinking while attempting to demonstrate and engage in caring behavior and atypical classroom settings, similar to many other feminist educators.
Leading feminist scholar bell hooks argues for the incorporation of feminism into all aspects of society, including education, in her book Feminism is for Everybody. hooks notes that, “Everything [people] know about feminism has come into their lives thirdhand”.[15] hooks believes that education offers a counter to the, “… wongminded notion of feminist movement which implied it was anti-male”.[15] hooks cites feminism’s negative connotations as major inhibitors to the spread and adoption of feminist ideologies. However, feminist education has seen tremendous growth in adoption in the past few decades, despite the negative connotations of its parent movement.[13]
Descriptive theories of education[edit]
Descriptive theories of education provide descriptions or explanations of the processes of education.
Curriculum theory[edit]
Main article: Curriculum theory
Descriptive theories of curriculum explain how curricula "benefit or harm all publics it touches".[17][18]
The term hidden curriculum describes that which is learned simply by being in a learning environment. For example, a student in a teacher-led classroom is learning submission. The hidden curriculum is not necessarily intentional.[19]
Instructional theory[edit]
Main article: Pedagogy
See also: Educational technology
Instructional theories focus on the methods of instruction for teaching curricula. Theories include the methods of: autonomous learning, coyote teaching, inquiry-based instruction, lecture, maturationism, socratic method, outcome-based education, taking children seriously, transformative learning
The nature of the learner and of learning[edit]
Main articles: Philosophical anthropology, Philosophy of education, Educational psychology, and Educational neuroscience
Philosophical Anthropology
Philosophical anthropology is the philosophical study of human nature. In terms of learning, examples of descriptive theories of the learner are: a mind, soul, and spirit capable of emulating the Absolute Mind (Idealism); an orderly, sensing, and rational being capable of understanding the world of things (Realism), a rational being with a soul modeled after God and who comes to know God through reason and revelation (Neo-Thomism), an evolving and active being capable of interacting with the environment (Pragmatism), a fundamentally free and individual being who is capable of being authentic through the making of and taking responsibility for choices (Existentialism).[20] Philosophical concepts for the process of education include Bildung and paideia.
Educational Psychology
Educational psychology is an empirical science that provides descriptive theories of how people learn. Examples of theories of education in psychology are: constructivism, behaviorism, cognitivism, and motivational theory
Educational Neuroscience
Educational neuroscience is an emerging field that brings together researchers in diverse disciplines to explore the interactions between biological processes and education.[21]
Sociology of education[edit]
Main article: Sociology of education
The sociology of education is the study of how public institutions and individual experiences affect education and its outcomes. It is most concerned with the public schooling systems of modern industrial societies, including the expansion of higher, further, adult, and continuing education.[22] Examples of theories of education from sociology include: functionalism, conflict theory, social efficiency, and social mobility.
Educational anthropology[edit]
Main article: Educational anthropology
Educational anthropology is a sub-field of anthropology and is widely associated with the pioneering work of George Spindler. As the name would suggest, the focus of educational anthropology is obviously on education, although an anthropological approach to education tends to focus on the cultural aspects of education, including informal as well as formal education. As education involves understandings of who we are, it is not surprising that the single most recognized dictum of educational anthropology is that the field is centrally concerned with cultural transmission.[23] Cultural transmission involves the transfer of a sense of identity between generations, sometimes known as enculturation[24] and also transfer of identity between cultures, sometimes known as acculturation.[25] Accordingly, thus it is also not surprising that educational anthropology has become increasingly focussed on ethnic identity and ethnic change.[26][27]
Educational Theorists[edit]





Michael Apple
Bill Ayers
Albert Bandura
William Chandler Bagley
Charles Beard
Allan Bloom
Theodore Brameld
Catharine Beecher
Harry Broudy
Nicholas Burbules
George Counts
John Dewey
Kieran Egan
Paulo Freire
Howard Gardner
Henry Giroux
Daniel Greenberg
John Holt
Mary Wollstonecraft
John Locke




bell hooks
Robert Hutchins
Jane Addams
Ivan Illich
David A. Kolb
Jonathan Kozol
Peter McLaren
Ellen Swallow Richards
Jerome Bruner
Richard Mitchell
Maria Montessori
A.S. Neill
Michael Adrian Peters
Jean Piaget
Harold Rugg
Rudolf Steiner
Max Stirner
Jane Roland Martin
Nel Noddings
Jean-Jacques Rousseau





See also[edit]

Anti-schooling activism
Classical education movement
Cognitivism (learning theory)
Andragogy
Geragogy
Humanistic education
International education
Peace education
Education research
Movement in learning
Co-construction, collaborative learning

Notes[edit]


^ [1]
^ [2]
^ [3]
^ Philip H. Phenix (January 1963). "Educational Theory and Inspiration". Educational Theory. 13 (1): 1–64. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5446.1963.tb00101.x. 
^ Gearing, Frederick (1975). A Cultural Theory of Education. Council on Anthropology and Education Quarterly. 6 (2). American Anthropological Association. pp. 1–9. 
^ Webb, DL, A Metha, and KF Jordan (2010). Foundations of American Education, 6th Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merill, pp. 77-80,192-193.
^ "Journal of Thought". Retrieved 19 November 2010. 
^ "Philosophy of Education and Wittgenstein's Concept of Language-Games". www.theradicalacademy.org. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ Frankena, William K.; Raybeck, Nathan; Burbules, Nicholas (2002), "Philosophy of Education", in Guthrie, James W., Encyclopedia of Education, 2nd edition, New York, NY: Macmillan Reference, ISBN 0-02-865594-X 
^ Webb, DL, A Metha, and KF Jordan (2010). Foundations of American Education, 6th Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merill, pp. 55-91
^ Barry, W. (2012). Is Modern American Public Education Promoting a Sane Society, in "International Journal of Science" 2nd Ed. ISSN 2225-7063, pp. 69-81, http://issuu.com/ijosc.net/docs/ijosc?mode=window&viewMode=doublePage
^ a b Beauchamp, George A. (Winter 1982). "Curriculum Theory: Meaning, Development, and Use". Theory into Practice. 21 (1): 23–27. doi:10.1080/00405848209542976. 
^ a b c d e Wiegman, Robyn (2002). "Feminism against Itself". NWSA Journal. 14.2: 18–37.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b c d e f g h Hoffmann, Frances L; Stake, Jayne E (1998). "Feminist Pedagogy in Theory and Practice: An Empirical Investigation". NWSA Journal. 10.1: 79–97.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b c hooks, bell (2000). Feminism is for Everybody. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. 
^ a b c Ropers-Huilman, Becky (1998). "Scholarship on the Other Side: Power and Caring in Feminist Education". NWSA Journal. 11.1: 118–135.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Connelly, F. Michael; Fang He, Ming; JoAnn; Phillion (2008), "Curriculum in Theory", The SAGE Handbook of Curriculum and Instruction, Sage, p. 394, ISBN 978-1-4129-0990-7 
^ Scott, Harry V. (April 1968). "A Primer of Curriculum Theory: Descriptive Theory". Educational Theory. 18 (2): 118–124. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5446.1968.tb00342.x. 
^ Martin, Jane. “What Should We Do with a Hidden Curriculum When We Find One?” The Hidden Curriculum and Moral Education. Ed. Giroux, Henry and David Purpel. Berkeley, California: McCutchan Publishing Corporation, 1983. 122–139.
^ Webb, DL, A Metha, and KF Jordan (2010). Foundations of American Education, 6th Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merill, pp. 55-62
^ Ansari, D; Coch, D (2006). "Bridges over troubled waters: Education and cognitive neuroscience". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. Elsevier Science. 10 (4): 146–151. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.02.007. PMID 16530462. 
^ Gordon Marshall (ed) A Dictionary of Sociology (Article: Sociology of Education), Oxford University Press, 1998
^ Comitas, L. and Dolgin, J. 1979. 'On Anthropology and Education: Retrospect and Prospect'. Anthropology and Education Quarterly. 9(1): 87-89
^ Page, J.S. Education and Acculturation on Malaita: An Ethnography of Intraethnic and Interethnic Affinities'.The Journal of Intercultural Studies. 1988. #15/16:74-81.
^ Page, J.S. Education and Acculturation on Malaita: An Ethnography of Intraethnic and Interethnic Affinities'.The Journal of Intercultural Studies. 1988. #15/16:74-81, available on-line at http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00003566/
^ Dynneson, T.L. 1984. 'An Anthropological Approach to Learning and Teaching'. Social Education. 48(6): 410-418.
^ Schensul, J.J. 1985. 'Cultural Maintenance and Cultural Transformation: Educational Anthropology in the Eighties'. Education and Anthropology Quarterly. 15(1): 63-68.


References[edit]

Kneller, George (1964). Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 
Dolhenty, Jonathan. "Philosophy of Education and Wittgenstein's Concept of Language-Games". The Radical Academy. Retrieved 19 November 2010. 
Thomas, G. (2007) Education and Theory: Strangers in Paradigms. Open University Press

External links[edit]

Educational Theory (Journal)
Journal of Thought
 Paul H. Hanus (1920). "Education, Study of". Encyclopedia Americana. 







v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla  (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject










Categories: Education theoryHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles to be merged from December 2017All articles to be mergedAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference