Cratylism







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help us clarify the article. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article contains wording that promotes the subject in a subjective manner without imparting real information. Please remove or replace such wording and instead of making proclamations about a subject's importance, use facts and attribution to demonstrate that importance. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article's factual accuracy is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Cratylism as a philosophical theory reflects the teachings of the Athenian Cratylus (Ancient Greek: Κρατύλος, also transliterated as Kratylos), fl. mid to late 5th century BCE. The term in philosophy comes about from Plato's classic dialogue, Cratylus. Vaguely exegetical, it holds that the fluid nature of ideas, words, and communications leaves them fundamentally baseless, and possibly unable to support logic and reason. Within the dialogue, those philosophical positions of Hermogenes and Cratylus are now what are referred to as ‘conventionalism’ and ‘naturalism.’
Overview[edit]
In this dialogue, Cratylus discusses the ‘correctness of names.’ If the name of an object, word, or phrase is the correct name for that particular thing, what is it exactly that makes this true?[1] The conventionalist Hermogenes contends that convention and agreement alone are what determine the correctness of names. Cratylus believes that names cannot just be given out at the will of convention or convenience; he holds that names have a natural belonging to their objects.[2]
Cratylism confronts issues about the nature of reality and communication similar to Taoism and Zen Buddhism: how can a mind in flux, in a flowing world, hold on to any solid "truth" and convey it to another mind?
A fellow-Greek sophist, Gorgias, expressed an equally ironic cul de sac conclusion about the nature of human epistemological understanding:

"Nothing exists. Even if something did exist, nothing can be known about it; and even if something can be known about it, knowledge about it cannot be communicated to others. And, finally, even if it can be communicated, it cannot be understood."[3]

Cratylus is said to have believed that nothing true can be said of things that change, and once a word is uttered, that thing has already changed and what was said is no longer true. Words, language, and the ‘correctness of names’ then give us a sort of false reality and sense of stability in a world where there is none. For Cratylus, we would be better off not speaking at all.[4] Thus, we have cratylism.
There is also heavy and credited speculation of Socrates’ humor in the dialogue. Socrates can be read as dismissing naturalism; and thus everything he says should be regarded as simply making fun of the etymological practice of ‘names.’[5]
See also[edit]

Conventionalism
Naturalism (philosophy)

References[edit]



^ "Plato's Philosophy of Language: The Cratylus". Outre monde. 2011-03-17. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ Sedley, David (2013-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
^ John Burnet, Greek Philosophy (1914), §96.
^ "Cratylus, Follower of Heraclitus". faculty.evansville.edu. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ Sedley, David (2013-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 









v
t
e


Philosophy of language



Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick





Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory





Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...





Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics








Category
Task Force
Discussion










This philosophy-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e








This linguistics article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e









Categories: Theories of languageLogicPhilosophy stubsLinguistics stubsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2016All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationArticles needing additional references from September 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with peacock terms from January 2018All articles with peacock termsAccuracy disputes from January 2018All accuracy disputesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll stub articles