Nautch




Nautch dancer in Calcutta, ca. 1900






A Raja awaits the arrival of Nautch dancers.






Nautch girl performing (1862)


In North India, Nautch (/ˈnɔːtʃ/) is one of several styles of popular dance, performed by girls known as Nautch girls. The word Nautch is an anglicized version of नाच (nāc), a word found in Hindi and Urdu (where it is spelled ناچ‬, and several other languages of North India, derived from the Sanskrit,[citation needed] Nritya, via the Prakrit, Nachcha. A simple and literal translation of Nautch is "dance" or "dancing".
The culture of the performing art of Nautch rose to prominence during the later period of Mughal Empire, and the British East India Company Rule.[1] Over time, the Nautch traveled outside the confines of the Imperial courts of the Mughals, the palaces of the Nawabs and the Princely states, and the higher echelons of the officials of the British Raj, to the places of smaller Zamindars, and other places.
Some references use the terms Nautch and Nautch girls to describe Devadasis who used to perform ritual and religious dances in the Hindu temples of India. However, there is not much similarity between the Devadasis and the Nautch girls. The former performed dances, mostly Indian classical dances, including the ritual dances, in the precincts of the Hindu temples to please the temple deities, whereas the Nautch girls performed Nautches for the pleasure of men. In 1917, attributing the adjective to a woman in India would suggest her entrancing skill, tempting style and alluring costume could mesmerize men to absolute obedience.[2]



Contents


1 See also
2 Further reading
3 References
4 External links



See also[edit]


Dance bar (India)
Devadasi
Helen
Indian folk dances
Tawaif
The Nautch Girl (1891 opera)
Prostitution in colonial India
Prostitution in India


Further reading[edit]

Nautch Girls of India: Dancers, Singers, Playmates by Pran Nevile

References[edit]



^ "Nautch girls: Sahibs danced to their tune". Retrieved 25 July 2004. 
^ Yasmini in "King, of the Khyber Rifles" by Talbot Mundy ISBN 0854681779 Tom Stacey 1972 orig 1917 hb, p16









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



External links[edit]
 Media related to Nautch at Wikimedia Commons




Categories: Indian female classical dancersPerformers of Indian classical danceCulture of Uttar PradeshHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2015Pages using div col with deprecated parametersArticles needing additional references from September 2011All articles needing additional references