叫牌盒





当前條目的内容正在依照其他语言维基百科的内容进行翻译。（2016年10月15日）
如果您熟知条目内容并擅长翻译，欢迎协助改善或校对这篇條目，长期闲置的非中文内容可能会被移除。  






叫牌盒



叫牌盒是桥牌中使用的设备，多见于复式桥牌竞赛之中。尽管有多种不同的配置和尺寸，典型的叫牌盒是一个有两个支撑斜面的塑料盒，各装有一组叫牌卡：一个是标有叫价的 35 张实质叫牌卡，另一个标有其他叫品（比如不叫，加倍等等）。


叫牌盒于1962年在瑞典发明，在1970年的世界桥牌锦标赛中首次使用，并最终传播至欧洲、美国乃至整个世界。今天，叫牌盒是一件几乎不可或缺的设备，甚至在家庭桥牌中也是如此。

相较口头叫牌，使用叫牌盒有几个优势：使房间更安静，防止叫牌被邻桌听见，叫牌过程易于回顾，并减少通过语气的改变向对家传递非法信息的可能性。





目录


1 构造
2 历史
3 流程
4 参考资料



构造[编辑]
典型的叫牌盒是一个有两个支撑斜面的塑料盒，各装有一组叫牌卡：一个是标有叫价的 35 张实质叫牌卡（四种花色和无将，1-7 七阶）。卡片上方剪出标签并交错排列，以利将其取出置于桌上。



另一个标有其他叫品，包括许多“不叫”（通常6—10张，多为绿色），少许“加倍”（红色，多标为“X”）及“再加倍”（蓝，“XX”），一张“提醒（ALERT）”卡（深蓝或浅蓝色），一张“停止叫牌（STOP）”卡（红），有时还有一种“锦标赛指导（Tournament Director）”卡（橙）。四名牌手各有一个卡盒，通常置于右手的桌角。在复式赛中，卡盒是固定在案头的。
There are two main types of bidding boxes: the more common ones are free-standing, placed in the corners on the tabletop. The hanging variant is smaller, with two holders closer together, and attached to the side of the table using C-clamps. The latter has the advantage that it doesn't occupy space on the table, but can hamper the players' passage to and from their seats, so it gets damaged more easily. In some tournaments an L-shaped metal bracket is slid under the tabletop corners, leaving its other end standing up. This is inserted into a slit in a free-standing bidding box, which then functions like a clamped one. Another alternative is to use side tables so that bidding boxes as well as refreshments and other belongings can be kept off the playing table. For storage purposes, the boxes usually have either a covered compartment on the bottom to store the bidding cards or a cover which is placed over the bidding cards attaching to the box base.
The bidding cards are made of cardboard or thin plastic; like playing cards, cardboard ones are more resistant to wearing (especially when plastic-coated), while plastic ones are more resistant to tearing. Manufacturers also offer the bidding card sets for purchase separately from the boxes.
历史[编辑]




使用叫牌卡完成的叫牌



A bridge auction consists of a series of subsequent calls (a bid, pass, double, or redouble) made by each player taking their turn to bid, until it is concluded by a sequence of three consecutive passes. With the transition from auction bridge to modern contract bridge, the bidding has become more complex, and conventional auctions often last through several rounds of bidding. Such long auctions are hard to memorize and review. In addition, oral bidding causes noise in tournament halls, and auctions can be easily overheard at the other tables.
Bidding boxes were invented in 1962 in Sweden by Gösta Nordenson[1] and first used at a World Bridge Championships game in Stockholm in 1970.[2] Eric Jannersten, a Swedish social bridge player and founder of the largest European bridge equipment manufacturer, Jannersten Förlag AB bought the patent in 1970[1] being attributed by some as the inventor.[3] However, the patent is disputed by the Swedish Bridge Federation.[4]
流程[编辑]
参考资料[编辑]

^ 1.0 1.1 Invention of the bidding box
^ Francis, Henry G., Editor-in-Chief; Truscott, Alan F., Executive Editor; Francis, Dorthy A., Editor, Sixth Edition (2001).
^ International Bridge Press Association Bulletin 互联网档案馆的存檔，存档日期2011-07-13. PDF, Issue 405, page 6, article written by Alan Truscott.
^ International Bridge Press Association Bulletin 互联网档案馆的存檔，存档日期2011-07-13. PDF, Issue 409, page 21.





分类：合約橋牌隐藏分类：Webarchive模板wayback链接自2016年10月正在翻譯的條目正在翻譯的條目