Symbiosism






This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Symbiosism is a philosophy about the mind and man’s place in nature. It is a Darwinian theory, which considers language an organism residing in the human brain and claims that language is a memetic life form. Symbiosism is defined by the Leiden School.
Overview[edit]
Memes are meanings, i.e. iso-functional neuroanatomical constructs corresponding to signs in the sense of Ferdinand de Saussure. Meanings thrive, replicate incessantly and constitute the essence of language. An essential characteristic of memes is that linguistic meanings have the nature of nonconstructible sets in the mathematical sense and do not abide by constraints governing Aristotelian logic, such as the principle of the excluded middle. The Leiden conception of the meme contrasts with the Oxford definition as a unit of imitation, a behavioral notion that in Leiden is captured by the term meme. The fecundity of memes as replicators and their fidelity of replication are limited, more so in pre-linguistic contexts.
Language is a mutualist symbiont and enters into a mutually beneficial relationship with its hominid host. Humans propagate language, whilst language furnishes the conceptual universe that guides and shapes the thinking of the hominid host. Language enhances the Darwinian fitness of the human species. Yet individual grammatical and lexical meanings and configurations of memes mediated by language may be either beneficial or deleterious to the biological host. The symbiosis is rendered more complex than just simple mutualism, both by the physiological discrepancy between language as an overall condition and the nature of individual ideas conveyed through language, as well as by the ecological difference between vertically and horizontally transmitted memes. The symbiotic theory of language propounded by George van Driem grew out of the Leiden school of language evolution, fathered by Frederik Kortlandt.
Resources[edit]

van Driem, George (2001). Languages of the Himalayas: An Ethnolinguistic Handbook of the Greater Himalayan Region : Containing an Introduction to the Symbiotic Theory of Language (2 vol). Brill. p. 1412. ISBN 90-04-12062-9. 
van Driem, George. 2003. The Language Organism: The Leiden theory of language evolution, in Jiří Mírovský, Anna Kotěšovcová and Eva Hajičová, eds., Proceedings of the XVIIth International Congress of Linguists, Prague, July 24–29, 2003. Prague: Matfyzpress vydavatelství Matematicko-fyzikální fakulty Univerzity Karlovy.
van Driem, George. 2004. Language as organism: A brief introduction to the Leiden theory of language evolution, pp. 1–9 in Ying-chin Lin, Fang-min Hsu, Chun-chih Lee, Jackson T.-S. Sun, Hsiu-fang Yang and Dah-ah Ho, eds., Studies on Sino-Tibetan Languages: Papers in Honor of Professor Hwang-cherng Gong on his Seventieth Birthday (Language and Linguistics Monograph Series W-4). Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, Academia
van Driem, George. 2005. The language organism: The Leiden theory of language evolution, pp. 331–340 in James W. Minett and William S-Y. Wang, eds., Language Acquisition, Change and Emergence: Essays in Evolutionary Linguistics. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.
Kortlandt, Frederik Herman Henri. 1985. A parasitological view of non-constructible sets, pp. 477–483 in Ursula Pieper and Gerhard Stickel, eds., Studia linguistica diachronica et synchronica: Werner Winter sexagenario anno MCMLXXXIII gratis animis ab eius collegis, amicis discipulisque oblata. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kortlandt, Frederik Herman Henri. 1998. Syntax and semantics in the history of Chinese, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 5: 167-176. Click here to read: [1]
Kortlandt, Frederik Herman Henri. 2003. The origin and nature of the linguistic parasite, pp. 241–244 in Brigitte Bauer and Georges-Jean Pinault, eds., Language in Time and Space: A Festschrift for Werner Winter on the Occasion of his 80th Birthday. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Click here to read: "http://www.kortlandt.nl/publications/art206e.pdf"
Salverda, Reinier. 1998. Is language a virus? Reflections on the use of biological metaphors in the study of language, pp. 191–209 in Mark Janse and An Verlinden, eds., Productivity and Creativity. Studies in General and Descriptive Linguistics in Honor of E.M. Uhlenbeck. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Salverda, Reinier. 2003. Letter to the Editor, New Scientist (1 February 2003), 2380: 25.
Wiedenhof, Jeroen Maarten. 1996. Nexus and the birth of syntax, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 28: 139-150. Click here to read: "http://www.wiedenhof.nl/ul/tk/pbl/articles/birthsyx.pdf"







v
t
e


Philosophy of language



Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick





Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory





Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...





Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics








Category
Task Force
Discussion










Categories: Theories of languageHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2011All articles lacking in-text citations