Self-report inventory


Part of a series on


Psychology







Outline
History
Subfields






Basic types


Abnormal
Behavioral genetics
Biological
Cognitive/Cognitivism
Comparative
Cross-cultural
Cultural
Differential
Developmental
Evolutionary
Experimental
Mathematical
Neuropsychology
Personality
Positive
Quantitative
Social








Applied psychology


Applied behavior analysis
Clinical
Community
Consumer
Counseling
Critical
Educational
Environmental
Ergonomics
Forensic
Health
Humanistic
Industrial and organizational
Legal
Medical
Military
Music
Occupational health
Political
Religion
School
Sport
Traffic








Lists


Disciplines
Organizations
Psychologists
Psychotherapies
Publications
Research methods
Theories
Timeline
Topics








 Psychology portal







v
t
e





A self-report inventory is a type of psychological test in which a person fills out a survey or questionnaire with or without the help of an investigator. Self-report inventories often ask direct questions about personal interests, values, symptoms, behaviors, and traits or personality types. Inventories are different from tests in that there is no objectively correct answer; responses are based on opinions and subjective perceptions. Most self-report inventories are brief and can be taken or administered within five to 15 minutes, although some, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), can take several hours to fully complete. They are popular because they can be inexpensive to give and to score, and their scores can often show good reliability.
There are three major approaches to developing self-report inventories: theory-guided, factor analysis, and criterion-keyed. Theory-guided inventories are constructed around a theory of personality or a prototype of a construct. Factor analysis uses statistical methods to organize groups of related items into subscales. Criterion-keyed inventories include questions that have been shown to statistically discriminate between a comparison group and a criterion group, such as people with clinical diagnoses of depression versus a control group.
Items could use any of several formats: a Likert scale with ranked options, true-false, or forced choice, although other formats such as sentence completion or visual analog scales are possible. True-false involves questions that the individual denotes as either being true or false about themselves. Forced-choice is a set of statements that require the individual to choose one as being most representative of themselves.
If the inventory includes items from different factors or constructs, the items can be mixed together or kept in groups. Sometimes the way people answer the item will change depending on the context offered by the neighboring items.



Contents


1 Personality inventories
2 Problems
3 Popular self-report inventories
4 See also
5 References



Personality inventories[edit]
Self-report personality inventories

Personality assessment tests that include questions dealing with situations, symptoms, and feelings. Test-takers-are asked to indicate how well each item describes themselves or how much they agree with each item.

Honesty of response may be the major problem with the self-report personality tests. Test questions are often transparent, and people can usually figure out how to respond to make themselves appear to possess whatever qualities they think the organization wants.
Problems[edit]
The biggest problem with self-report inventories is that patients may exaggerate symptoms in order to make their situation seem worse, or they may under-report the severity or frequency of symptoms in order to minimize their problems. For this reason, self-report inventories are more often used primarily for measuring levels of traits, or for symptom severity and change. Inventories should be used in isolation to diagnose a mental disorder. Clinical discretion is advised for all self-report inventories.
Another issue is the social desirability bias, which can cause over-reporting of socially desirable and under-reporting of socially undesirable behaviors.
Many personality tests, such as the MMPI or the MBTI add questions that are designed to make it difficult for a person to exaggerate traits and symptoms. However, these tests suffer from the inherent problems associated with personality theory and testing, in that personality is a fluid concept that can be difficult to define.
Popular self-report inventories[edit]

16 PF
Beck Anxiety Inventory
Beck Depression Inventory
Beck Hopelessness Scale
California Psychological Inventory
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
Geriatric Depression Scale
Hirschfeld Mood Disorder Questionnaire
Kuder Occupational Interest Survey
Major Depression Inventory
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
Personality Inventory for Children-2
Revised NEO Personality Inventory
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory

See also[edit]

Self-report study
Affect measures

References[edit]







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Aiken, L. R. (2002) Psychological Testing and Assessment. New York: Allyn & Bacon
Gregory, R. J. (2007) Psychological Testing: History, Principles, and Applications (5th ed.). Boston: Pearson Education
Schultz, Sydney Ellen; Schultz, Duane P. (2005). Psychology and Work Today. New York: Prentice Hall. p. 116. ISBN 0-13-193212-8.





Categories: Personality testsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2014All articles lacking in-text citations