International Children's Festival






This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view. (May 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The International Children’s Festival, presented by Meridian International Center Educational Outreach Programs, is an interactive and educational fair that brings the community together with the diplomatic corps of Washington, D.C. Diplomatic embassies host booths about their country and culture intended to introduce children and their families to world geography, dress, and traditions through displays and activities.




Playing with Mexican toys at the 2008 International Children's Festival


In addition to embassy-sponsored booths, the festival offers international dance and music performances, as well as opportunities to sample international cuisine. In 2009, Michelle Fenty, wife of DC Mayor Adrian M. Fenty, supported the festival by serving as Honorary Patron of the event.
The International Children’s Festival is held every May and is located in Meridian’s historic mansions.



Contents


1 Description

1.1 Participating Embassies 2010


2 Performances

2.1 Performances for 2010


3 Other Educational Outreach Programs

3.1 International Classroom
3.2 International Resource Library
3.3 Teacher Workshops


4 References



Description[edit]




The Embassy of Egypt's booth


Embassies host booths at the Festival, allowing visitors to experience another culture. Toward this goal, embassies bring artifacts, displays, and activities about their country and culture.




Children learn about Brazil's Carnival celebrations while decorating masks


Food and drink samples are present at each booth, as well as crafts and educational activities designed to engage attendees and a two-way cultural exchange between the embassy staff and the participating families. Booth activities have included trying on traditional Indonesian dress, stamping Kente cloth (Ghana), folding origami (Japan), writing hieroglyphics (Egypt), creating Carnival masks (Brazil), exploring Mexican children's toys and more. Cultural representatives and embassy staff from each country are present to answer questions and interact with attendees.
Participating Embassies 2010[edit]
Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Brazil, China, El Salvador, Fiji, France, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Senegal, South Africa, Switzerland, Turkey, Zambia, as well as representation from the United Nations.
Performances[edit]
In addition to the interactive booths sponsored by embassies, the Festival exhibits dance performances from local and international artists. These performances showcase cultural styles from around the world.
Performances for 2010[edit]




India's Bhangra Dancers from the 2008 Festival



Stepping Africa Geography Dance, USA- Paul Public Charter School, DC
Maculele & Capoeira Martial Arts Dance, Brazil- ABADA-CAPOEIRA
Traditional Dance, Argentina- Escuela Argentina, DC
Irish Dance, Ireland- The O'Neill-James School of Irish Dance
Belly Dance, Middle Eastern Dance- Joy of Motion
African Drumming, Africa- Kofi Dennis
Chaynanm Haitian Percussion Band
A.H. Dance Company
Raqs Jameel Bellydancing
Nomad Dancers
Halau O'Aulani Hula Dancing
Balaji Music Academy Indian Dance
Fairfax Chinese Dance Troupe
Washington DC Turkish Folkdance Troupe

Other Educational Outreach Programs[edit]
International Classroom[edit]




Students posing after a Costa Rica presentation


The International Children’s Festival is a part of Meridian’s educational outreach initiatives — the flagship of which is the International Classroom, currently in its 19th year of bringing the world into District of Columbia Public School classrooms. The International Classroom trains volunteers from the international community to present interactive lessons on their home country to students in grades 2-12. Presentations are organized by Meridian in response to a high demand from DC public school teachers, and Meridian staff works closely with volunteers to ensure that presentations are tailored to each audience based on grade level. In the 2007-2008 school year, International Classroom worked with over 100 volunteers from 50 countries and reached over 2,500 students.




Morocco Culture Box


International Resource Library[edit]
International Classroom also offers teachers other resources to help them include more international education in their curricula. Meridian’s 50+ Culture Boxes contain items from a specific country or region that teachers can use as hands-on learning tools to help students make a tangible connection to other parts of the world.
Teacher Workshops[edit]
International Classroom also offers a professional development workshop, Passports to the World, for DC teachers each Fall on how to internationalize their curricula while meeting current Standards of Learning. These workshops help teachers discover new methods of incorporating international education across the curricula. Over the course of six afternoons, teachers will travel to five different continents, exploring themes, ideas, and techniques to use in the classroom. Working in cooperation with Peace Corps: World Wise Schools and the National Geographic Society Education Foundation, teachers also earn credits toward recertification.
References[edit]

(1) Meridian International Center (2) Meridian International Center Photo Gallery (3) DC About.com (4) Embassy of Indonesia (5) DC Urban Mom (6) Cultural Tourism DC




Categories: Children's festivalsHidden categories: Articles with a promotional tone from May 2013All articles with a promotional tone