Philosophy of perception




Do we see what is really there? The two areas of the image marked A and B, and the rectangle connecting them, are all of the same shade: our eyes automatically "correct" for the shadow of the cylinder.


The philosophy of perception is concerned with the nature of perceptual experience and the status of perceptual data, in particular how they relate to beliefs about, or knowledge of, the world.[1] Any explicit account of perception requires a commitment to one of a variety of ontological or metaphysical views. Philosophers distinguish internalist accounts, which assume that perceptions of objects, and knowledge or beliefs about them, are aspects of an individual's mind, and externalist accounts, which state that they constitute real aspects of the world external to the individual.[1] The position of naïve realism—the 'everyday' impression of physical objects constituting what is perceived—is to some extent contradicted by the occurrence of perceptual illusions and hallucinations[2] and the relativity of perceptual experience[1] as well as certain insights in science.[3] Realist conceptions include phenomenalism and direct and indirect realism. Anti-realist conceptions include idealism and skepticism.[1]



Contents


1 Categories of perception
2 Scientific accounts of perception
3 Philosophical accounts of perception
4 Spatial representation
5 See also
6 References
7 Sources and further reading
8 External links



Categories of perception[edit]
We may categorize perception as internal or external.

Internal perception (proprioception) tells us what is going on in our bodies; where our limbs are, whether we are sitting or standing, whether we are depressed, hungry, tired and so forth.
External or sensory perception (exteroception), tells us about the world outside our bodies. Using our senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste, we perceive colors, sounds, textures, etc. of the world at large. There is a growing body of knowledge of the mechanics of sensory processes in cognitive psychology.
Mixed internal and external perception (e.g., emotion and certain moods) tells us about what is going on in our bodies and about the perceived cause of our bodily perceptions.

The philosophy of perception is mainly concerned with exteroception.
Scientific accounts of perception[edit]
An object at some distance from an observer will reflect light in all directions, some of which will fall upon the corneae of the eyes, where it will be focussed upon each retina, forming an image. The disparity between the electrical output of these two slightly different images is resolved either at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus or in a part of the visual cortex called 'V1'. The resolved data is further processed in the visual cortex where some areas have specialised functions, for instance area V5 is involved in the modelling of motion and V4 in adding colour. The resulting single image that subjects report as their experience is called a 'percept'. Studies involving rapidly changing scenes show the percept derives from numerous processes that involve time delays.[4] Recent fMRI studies [5] show that dreams, imaginings and perceptions of things such as faces are accompanied by activity in many of the same areas of brain as are involved with physical sight. Imagery that originates from the senses and internally generated imagery may have a shared ontology at higher levels of cortical processing.
Sound is analyzed in term of pressure waves sensed by the cochlea in the ear. Data from the eyes and ears is combined to form a 'bound' percept. The problem of how this is produced, known as the binding problem.
Perception is analyzed as a cognitive process in which information processing is used to transfer information into the mind where it is related to other information. Some psychologists propose that this processing gives rise to particular mental states (cognitivism) whilst others envisage a direct path back into the external world in the form of action (radical behaviourism). Behaviourists such as John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner have proposed that perception acts largely as a process between a stimulus and a response but have noted that Gilbert Ryle's "ghost in the machine of the brain" still seems to exist. "The objection to inner states is not that they do not exist, but that they are not relevant in a functional analysis".[6] This view, in which experience is thought to be an incidental by-product of information processing, is known as epiphenomenalism.
Contrary to the behaviouralist approach to understanding the elements of cognitive processes, gestalt psychology sought to understand their organization as a whole, studying perception as a process of figure and ground.
Philosophical accounts of perception[edit]
Important philosophical problems derive from the epistemology of perception—how we can gain knowledge via perception—such as the question of the nature of qualia.[7] Within the biological study of perception naive realism is unusable.[8] However, outside biology modified forms of naive realism are defended. Thomas Reid, the eighteenth-century founder of the Scottish School of Common Sense, formulated the idea that sensation was composed of a set of data transfers but also declared that there is still a direct connection between perception and the world. This idea, called direct realism, has again become popular in recent years with the rise of postmodernism.
The succession of data transfers involved in perception suggests that sense data are somehow available to a perceiving subject that is the substrate of the percept. Indirect realism, the view held by John Locke and Nicolas Malebranche, proposes that we can only be aware of mental representations of objects. however this may imply an infinite regress (a perceiver within a perceiver within a perceiver...), though a finite regress is perfectly possible.[9] It also assumes that perception is entirely due to data transfer and information processing, an argument that can be avoided by proposing that the percept does not depend wholly upon the transfer and rearrangement of data. This still involves basic ontological issues of the sort raised by Leibniz[10] Locke, Hume, Whitehead and others, which remain outstanding particularly in relation to the binding problem, the question of how different perceptions (e.g. color and contour in vision) are "bound" to the same object when they are processed by separate areas of the brain.
Indirect realism (representational views) provides an account of issues such as perceptual contents,[11][12] qualia, dreams, imaginings, hallucinations, illusions, the resolution of binocular rivalry, the resolution of multistable perception, the modelling of motion that allows us to watch TV, the sensations that result from direct brain stimulation, the update of the mental image by saccades of the eyes and the referral of events backwards in time. Direct realists must either argue that these experiences do not occur or else refuse to define them as perceptions.
Idealism holds that reality is limited to mental qualities while skepticism challenges our ability to know anything outside our minds. One of the most influential proponents of idealism was George Berkeley who maintained that everything was mind or dependent upon mind. Berkeley's idealism has two main strands, phenomenalism in which physical events are viewed as a special kind of mental event and subjective idealism. David Hume is probably the most influential proponent of skepticism.
A fourth theory of perception in opposition to naive realism, enactivism, attempts to find a middle path between direct realist and indirect realist theories, positing that cognition arises as a result of the dynamic interplay between an organism's sensory-motor capabilities and its environment. Instead of seeing perception as a passive process determined entirely by the features of an independently existing world, enactivism suggests that organism and environment are structurally coupled and co-determining. The theory was first formalized by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch in "The Embodied Mind".[13]
Spatial representation[edit]
An aspect of perception that is common to both realists and anti-realists is the idea of mental or perceptual space. David Hume concluded that things appear extended because they have attributes of colour and solidity. A popular modern philosophical view is that the brain cannot contain images so our sense of space must be due to the actual space occupied by physical things. However, as René Descartes noticed, perceptual space has a projective geometry, things within it appear as if they are viewed from a point. The phenomenon of perspective was closely studied by artists and architects in the Renaissance, who relied mainly on the 11th century polymath, Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham), who affirmed the visibility of perceptual space in geometric structuring projections.[14][15] Mathematicians now know of many types of projective geometry such as complex Minkowski space that might describe the layout of things in perception (see Peters (2000)) and it has also emerged that parts of the brain contain patterns of electrical activity that correspond closely to the layout of the retinal image (this is known as retinotopy). How or whether these become conscious experience is still unknown (see McGinn (1995)).
See also[edit]


Anil Gupta
Argument from illusion
Arthur Schopenhauer
Āyatana (Sense Bases in Theravada Buddhism)
Binding problem
Consciousness
Direct realism
Epistemology
George Berkeley
Hallucinations in the sane
Immanuel Kant
Idealism
Indirect realism
Johann Ge Moll
John McDowell
Fiona Macpherson
Map-territory relation
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Mind's eye
Multistable perception
Perception
Philosophical realism
Roderick Chisholm
Sensorium
Subjective character of experience
Susanna Schellenberg
Susanna Siegel
Thomas Reid
Louise Richardson
Transcendental idealism
Visual perception
Visual space


References[edit]



^ a b c d cf. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/perception-episprob/ BonJour, Laurence (2007): "Epistemological Problems of Perception." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, accessed 1.9.2010.
^ cf. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/perception-problem/ Crane, Tim (2005): "The Problem of Perception." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, accessed 1.9.2010; Drestske, Fred (1999): "Perception." In: Robert Audi, The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, Second Edition, Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press, pp. 654–658, here p. 656.
^ cf. Alva Noë (2006): Perception. In: Sahotra Sarkar/Jessica Pfeifer (Eds.), The Philosophy of Science: An Encyclopedia, New York: Routledge, pp. 545–550, here p. 546 ff.
^ see Moutoussis and Zeki (1997)
^ "Brain decoding: Reading minds". 
^ Skinner 1953
^ Chalmers DJ. (1995) "Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, 3, 200–219
^ Smythies J. (2003) "Space, time and consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 10, 3, 47–64.
^ Edwards JC. (2008) "Are our spaces made of words?" Journal of Consciousness Studies 15, 1, 63–83.
^ Woolhouse RS and Franks R. (1998) GW Leibniz, Philosophical Texts, Oxford University Press.
^ Siegel, S. (2011)."The Contents of Perception", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2011/entries/perception-contents/>.
^ Siegel, S.: The Contents of Visual Experience. New York: Oxford University Press. 2010
^ Varela F, Thompson E, Rosch E (1991) "The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience" MIT Press
^ Nader El-Bizri (2004). "La perception de la profondeur: Alhazen, Berkeley et Merleau-Ponty". Oriens-Occidens, CNRS. Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. 5: 171–184. 
^ Nader El-Bizri (2007). "In Defence of the Sovereignty of Philosophy: al-Baghdadi's Critique of Ibn al-Haytham's Geometrisation of Place". Arabic Sciences and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. 17: 57–80. doi:10.1017/s0957423907000367. 



Sources and further reading[edit]






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (February 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Chalmers DJ. (1995) "Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, 3, 200–219.
Wikibooks: Consciousness Studies
BonJour, Laurence (2001). "Epistemological Problems of Perception," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward Zalta (ed.). Online text
Burge, Tyler (1991). "Vision and Intentional Content," in E. LePore and R. Van Gulick (eds.) John Searle and his Critics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Crane, Tim (2005). "The Problem of Perception," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward Zalta (ed.). Online text
Descartes, Rene (1641). Meditations on First Philosophy. Online text
Dretske, Fred (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information, Oxford: Blackwell.
Evans, Gareth (1982). The Varieties of Reference, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Flynn, Bernard (2004). "Maurice Merleau-Ponty," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward Zalta (ed.). Online text
Hume, David (1739–40). A Treatise of Human Nature: Being An Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning Into Moral Subjects. Online text
Kant, Immanuel (1781). Critique of Pure Reason. Norman Kemp Smith (trans.) with preface by Howard Caygill, Palgrave Macmillan. Online text
Lacewing, Michael (unpublished). "Phenomenalism." Online PDF
Locke, John (1689). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Online text
McCreery, Charles (2006). "Perception and Hallucination: the Case for Continuity." Philosophical Paper No. 2006-1. Oxford: Oxford Forum. Online PDF
McDowell, John, (1982). "Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge," Proceedings of the British Academy, pp. 455–79.
McDowell, John, (1994). Mind and World, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
McGinn, Colin (1995). "Consciousness and Space," In Conscious Experience, Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Imprint Academic. Online text
Mead, George Herbert (1938). "Mediate Factors in Perception," Essay 8 in The Philosophy of the Act, Charles W. Morris with John M. Brewster, Albert M. Dunham and David Miller (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago, pp. 125–139. Online text
Moutoussis, K. and Zeki, S. (1997). "A Direct Demonstration of Perceptual Asynchrony in Vision," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences, 264, pp. 393–399.
Noe, Alva/Thompson, Evan T.: Vision and Mind: Selected Readings in the Philosophy of Perception, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002.
Peacocke, Christopher (1983). Sense and Content, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peters, G. (2000). "Theories of Three-Dimensional Object Perception - A Survey," Recent Research Developments in Pattern Recognition, Transworld Research Network. Online text
Putnam, Hilary (1999). The Threefold Cord, New York: Columbia University Press.
Read, Czerne (unpublished). "Dreaming in Color." Online text
Russell, Bertrand (1912). The Problems of Philosophy, London: Williams and Norgate; New York: Henry Holt and Company. Online text
Shoemaker, Sydney (1990). "Qualities and Qualia: What's in the Mind?" Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50, Supplement, pp. 109–31.
Siegel, Susanna (2005). "The Contents of Perception," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward Zalta (ed.). Online text
Tong, Frank (2003). "Primary Visual Cortex and Visual Awareness," Nature Reviews, Neuroscience, Vol 4, 219. Online text
Tye, Michael (2000). Consciousness, Color and Content, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Infoactivity Genesis of perception investigation

External links[edit]

O'Brien, Daniel. "Epistemology of Perception". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
O'Brien, Daniel. "Objects of Perception". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Crane, T.; French, C. (2015). "The Problem of Perception". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
BonJour, L. "Epistemological Problems of Perception". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 







v
t
e


Epistemology



Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Roger Gibson
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Bertrand Russell
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle





Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism





Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...





Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology








Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion












v
t
e


Psychology






History
Philosophy
Portal
Psychologist





Basic psychology



Abnormal
Affective science
Affective neuroscience
Behavioral genetics
Behavioral neuroscience
Behaviorism
Cognitive/Cognitivism
Cognitive neuroscience
Comparative
Cross-cultural
Cultural
Developmental
Differential
Ecological
Evolutionary
Experimental
Gestalt
Intelligence
Mathematical
Neuropsychology
Personality
Positive
Psycholinguistics
Psychophysics
Psychophysiology
Quantitative
Social
Theoretical





Applied psychology



Anomalistic
Applied behavior analysis
Assessment
Clinical
Community
Consumer
Counseling
Critical
Educational
Ergonomics
Feminist
Forensic
Health
Industrial and organizational
Legal
Media
Military
Music
Occupational health
Pastoral
Political
Psychometrics
Psychotherapy
Religion
School
Sport and exercise
Suicidology
Systems
Traffic





Methodologies



Animal testing
Archival research
Behavior epigenetics
Case study
Content analysis
Experiments
Human subject research
Interviews
Neuroimaging
Observation
Qualitative research
Quantitative research
Self-report inventory
Statistical surveys






Psychologists




William James (1842–1910)
Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936)
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Edward Thorndike (1874–1949)
Carl Jung (1875–1961)
John B. Watson (1878–1958)
Clark L. Hull (1884–1952)
Kurt Lewin (1890–1947)
Jean Piaget (1896–1980)
Gordon Allport (1897–1967)
J. P. Guilford (1897–1987)
Carl Rogers (1902–1987)
Erik Erikson (1902–1994)
B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)
Donald O. Hebb (1904–1985)
Ernest Hilgard (1904–2001)
Harry Harlow (1905–1981)
Raymond Cattell (1905–1998)
Abraham Maslow (1908–1970)
Neal E. Miller (1909–2002)
Jerome Bruner (1915–2016)
Donald T. Campbell (1916–1996)
Hans Eysenck (1916–1997)
Herbert A. Simon (1916–2001)
David McClelland (1917–1998)
Leon Festinger (1919–1989)
George Armitage Miller (1920–2012)
Richard Lazarus (1922–2002)
Stanley Schachter (1922–1997)
Robert Zajonc (1923–2008)
Albert Bandura (b. 1925)
Roger Brown (1925–1997)
Endel Tulving (b. 1927)
Lawrence Kohlberg (1927–1987)
Noam Chomsky (b. 1928)
Ulric Neisser (1928–2012)
Jerome Kagan (b. 1929)
Walter Mischel (b. 1930)
Elliot Aronson (b. 1932)
Daniel Kahneman (b. 1934)
Paul Ekman (b. 1934)
Michael Posner (b. 1936)
Amos Tversky (1937–1996)
Bruce McEwen (b. 1938)
Larry Squire (b. 1941)
Richard E. Nisbett (b. 1941)
Martin Seligman (b. 1942)
Ed Diener (b. 1946)
Shelley E. Taylor (b. 1946)
John Anderson (b. 1947)
Ronald C. Kessler (b. 1947)
Joseph E. LeDoux (b. 1949)
Richard Davidson (b. 1951)
Susan Fiske (b. 1952)
Roy Baumeister (b. 1953)





Lists



Counseling topics
Disciplines
Important publications
Organizations
Outline
Psychologists
Psychotherapies
Research methods
Schools of thought
Timeline
Topics








Wiktionary definition
Wiktionary category
Wikisource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikinews
Wikibooks












v
t
e


Philosophy of mind



Theories



Behaviorism (Radical)
Biological naturalism
Cognitive psychology
Mind–body dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Emergentism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism

Neurophenomenology


Neutral monism
Occasionalism
Psychoanalysis
Parallelism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology
Physicalism

identity theory


Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Substance dualism





Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem

Non-physical entity


New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...





Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self








Portal
Category
Philosophers category
Project
Task Force












v
t
e


Philosophy of science







Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science





Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism
Rationalism / Empiricism
Received view / Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism





Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time





Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance













Philosophers of science by era







Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans





Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby





Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume





Classical modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson





Late modern



Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett














Portal
Category










Categories: EpistemologyPhilosophy of mindPerceptionHidden categories: Pages using div col with deprecated parametersArticles lacking in-text citations from February 2008All articles lacking in-text citations