Social epistemology
This article is about the discipline. For the journal, see Social Epistemology (journal).


Sociology







History
Outline
Portal




Main theories




Structural functionalism
Conflict theory
Symbolic interactionism




Methods




Quantitative
Qualitative
Historical
Comparative
Mathematical
Computational
Ethnography
Ethnomethodology
Network analysis
Positivism
Critical theory




Subfields and other major theories




Conflict
Criminology
Social constructionism
Culture
Development
Deviance
Demography
Education
Economic
Environmental
Family
Feminist sociology
Gender
Health
Industrial
Inequality
Knowledge
Law
Literature
Medical
Military
Organizational
Political
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science
Social change
Social movements
Social psychology in sociology
Stratification
Science and technology
Technology
Urban
Utilitarianism




Browse




Bibliography
By country
Index
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline







v
t
e





Social Epistemology refers to a broad set of approaches that can be taken in the study of knowledge that construes human knowledge as a collective achievement. Another way of characterizing social epistemology is as the evaluation of the social dimensions of knowledge or information.[1] It is sometimes simplified to mean a social justification of belief.[2]
One of the enduring difficulties with defining "Social Epistemology" that arises is the attempt to determine what the word "knowledge" means in this context. There is also a challenge in arriving at a definition of "social" which satisfies academics from different disciplines.[3] Social Epistemologists may exist working in many of the disciplines of the humanities and social sciences, most commonly in philosophy and sociology. In addition to marking a distinct movement in traditional and analytic epistemology, Social Epistemology is associated with the interdisciplinary field of Science and Technology Studies (STS).



Contents


1 History

1.1 The rise of 'Social Epistemology'


2 Social Epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy
3 Major philosophers who influenced Social Epistemology
4 Present and future concerns
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Citations
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
The consideration of Social dimensions of knowledge in relation to philosophy started in 380 B.C.E with Plato's dialogue: Charmides. In it he questions the degree of certainty an unprofessional in a field can have towards a person's claim to be a specialist in that same field. As the exploration of a dependence on authoritative figures constitutes a part of the study of Social Epistemology, it confirms the existence of the ideology in minds long before it was given its label.
In 1936, Karl Mannheim turned Karl Marx's theory of ideology (which interpreted the 'social' aspect in Epistemology to be of a political or sociological nature) into an analysis of how the human society develops and functions.
It was not until the 1970s that there was a powerful growth of interest amongst philosophers in topics such as epistemic value of testimony, the nature and function of expertise, proper distribution of cognitive labor and resources among individuals in the communities and the status of group reasoning and knowledge.
The rise of 'Social Epistemology'[edit]
The term "Social Epistemology" was firstly used by the library scientists Margaret Egan and Jesse Shera in the 1950s. Steven Shapin also used it in 1979. However, it was not until the late 1980s that its current sense began to emerge. In 1987, the philosophical journal Synthese published a special issue on "Social Epistemology" which included two authors that have since taken the branch of Epistemology in two divergent directions: Alvin Goldman and Steve Fuller3. Fuller founded a journal called Social Epistemology: a journal of knowledge, culture, and policy in 1987 and published his first book, Social Epistemology, in 1988. Goldman's Knowledge in a Social World came out in 1999. Goldman advocates for a type of epistemology which is sometimes called "veritistic epistemology" because of its large emphasis on truth.[4] This type of epistemology is sometimes seen to side with "essentialism" as opposed to "multiculturalism".[5] But Goldman has argued that this association between veritistic epistemology and essentialism is not necessary.[6] He describes Social Epistemology as knowledge derived from one's interactions with another person, group or society.
Goldman looks into one of the two strategies of the socialization of Epistemology. This strategy includes the evaluation of social factors that impact knowledge formed on true belief. In contrast, Fuller takes preference for the second strategy that defines knowledge influenced by social factors as collectively accepted belief. The difference between the two can be simplified with exemplars e.g.: the first strategy means analyzing how your degree of wealth (a social factor) influences what information you determine to be valid whilst the second strategy occurs when an evaluation is done on wealth’s influence upon your knowledge acquired from the beliefs of the society in which you find yourself.[7]
In 2012, on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of Social Epistemology, Fuller reflected upon the history and the prospects of the field, including the need for Social Epistemology to re-connect with the larger issues of knowledge production first identified by Charles Sanders Peirce as cognitive economy and nowadays often pursued by library and information science. As for the "analytic Social Epistemology", to which Goldman has been a significant contributor, Fuller concludes that it has "failed to make significant progress owing, in part, to a minimal understanding of actual knowledge practices, a minimised role for philosophers in ongoing inquiry, and a focus on maintaining the status quo of epistemology as a field."[1]
The basic view of knowledge that motivated the emergence of Social Epistemology as it is perceived today can be traced to the work of Thomas Kuhn and Michel Foucault, which gained acknowledgment at the end of the 1960s. Both brought historical concerns directly to bear on problems long associated with the philosophy of science. Perhaps the most notable issue here was the nature of truth, which both Kuhn and Foucault described as a relative and contingent notion. On this background, ongoing work in the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) and the history and philosophy of science (HPS) was able to assert its epistemological consequences, leading most notably to the establishment of the "Strong Programme" at the University of Edinburgh. In terms of the two strands of social epistemology, Fuller is more sensitive and receptive to this historical trajectory (if not always in agreement) than Goldman, whose "veritistic" social epistemology can be reasonably read as a systematic rejection of the more extreme claims associated with Kuhn and Foucault.
Social Epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy[edit]
As a field within analytic philosophy, Social Epistemology foregrounds the social aspects of knowledge creation and dissemination. What precisely these social aspects are, and whether they have beneficial or detrimental effects upon the possibilities to create, acquire and spread knowledge is a subject of continuous debate.
Within the field, `the social' is approached in two complementary and not mutually exclusive ways: `the social' character of knowledge can either be approached through inquiries in inter-individual epistemic relations or through inquiries focusing on epistemic communities. The inter-individual approach typically focuses on issues such as testimony, epistemic trust as a form of trust placed by one individual in another, epistemic dependence, epistemic authority, etc. The community approach typically focuses on issues such as community standards of justification, community procedures of critique, diversity, epistemic justice, and collective knowledge.[8]
Social Epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy has close ties to, and often overlaps with Feminist Epistemology and Philosophy of Science. While parts of the field engage in abstract, normative considerations of knowledge creation and dissemination, other parts of the field are `naturalized Epistemology' in the sense that they draw on empirically gained insights---which could mean natural science research from, e.g., cognitive psychology, be that qualitative or quantitative social science research. (For the notion of `naturalized epistemology see Willard Van Orman Quine.) And while parts of the field are concerned with analytic considerations of rather general character, case-based and domain-specific inquiries in, e.g., knowledge creation in collaborative scientific practice, knowledge exchange on online platforms or knowledge gained in learning institutions play an increasing role.
Important academic journals for Social Epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy are, e.g., Episteme,[9] Hypatia,[10] Social Epistemology,[11] and Synthese.[12] However, major works within this field are also published in journals that predominantly address philosophers of science and psychology or in interdisciplinary journals which focus on particular domains of inquiry (such as, e.g., Ethics and Information Technology[13]).
Major philosophers who influenced Social Epistemology[edit]

Plato in Charmides Dialogue
John Locke in Problem of Testimony
David Hume in Problem of Testimony
Thomas Reid in Problem of Testimony
Karl Marx in Conception of Ideology

extended by Karl Mannheim who portrayed the sociological aspect of knowledge with the reasoning that a knowledge claim's validity is restricted by the social conditions wherein the claims were initially made.



Present and future concerns[edit]
In both stages, both varieties of "Social Epistemology" remain largely "academic" or "theoretical" projects. Yet both emphasize the social significance of knowledge and therefore the cultural value of social epistemology itself. A range of journals publishing Social Epistemology welcome papers that include a policy dimension.
More practical applications of social epistemology can be found in the areas of library science, academic publishing, guidelines for scientific authorship and collaboration, knowledge policy and debates over the role over the Internet in knowledge transmission and creation.
Social Epistemology is still considered a relatively new addition to philosophy, with its problems and theories still fresh and in rapid movement.[14]
See also[edit]

Epistemology
Feminist Epistemology
Sociology of knowledge
Steve Fuller, Social Epistemologist
Social constructionism
Social philosophy
Reflexivity (social theory)

Notes[edit]
1. "What Is Social Epistemology? A Smorgasbord of projects", in Pathways to Knowledge: Private and Public, Oxford University Press, Pg:182-204, ISBN 0-19-517367-8
2. "Relativism, Rationalism and the Sociology of Knowledge", Barry Barnes and David Bloor, in Rationality and Relativism, Pg:22 ISBN 0-262-58061-6
3. A comparison of Goldman and Fuller can be found in Legitimizing Scientific Knowledge: An Introduction to Steve Fuller's Social Epistemology, Francis Remedios, Lexington Books, 2003. pp. 106 –112.
http://social-epistemology.com/2013/07/12/orienting-social-epistemology-francis-remedios/
4. Social Epistemology, Steve Fuller, Indiana University Press, p. 3.
Citations[edit]



^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epistemology-social/
^ Goldman, Alvin; Blanchard, Thomas (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epistemology-social/
^ http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/goldman.html
^ http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/goldman.html
^ http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/goldman.html
^ Rimkutė, Audronė (2014-09-28). "The Problem of Social Knowledge in Contemporary Social Epistemology: Two Approaches". Problemos (in Lithuanian). 0 (65): 4–19. doi:10.15388/Problemos.2004.65.6645. ISSN 1392-1126. 
^ "Social Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "Episteme, a journal of individual and social epistemology". http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayJournal?jid=EPI. Cambridge University Press.  External link in |website= (help); Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Hypatia". John Wiley & Sons. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "Social Epistemology. A Journal of Knowledge, Culture and Policy". Taylor and Francis. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "Synthese". Springer. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "Ethics and Information Technology". Springer. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ Schmitt, Frederick F.; Scholz, Oliver R. (2010-02-01). "Introduction: The History of Social Epistemology". Episteme. 7 (1): 1–6. doi:10.3366/E174236000900077X. ISSN 1750-0117. 



References[edit]

Berlin, James A. Rhetorics, Poetics, and Cultures: Refiguring College English Studies, Indiana: Parlor Press, 2003. ISBN 0-9724772-8-4
Egan, Margaret and Jesse Shera. 1952. "Foundations of a Theory of Bibliography." Library Quarterly 44:125-37.
Goldman, Alvin; Blanchard, Thomas (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Goldman, Alvin,. "Social Epistemology". stanford.library.sydney.edu.au. Retrieved 2017-02-22.
Longino, Helen. 1990. Science as Social Knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02051-5
Longino, Helen. 2001. The Fate of Knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-08876-4
Remedios, Francis. 2003. Legitimizing Scientific Knowledge: An Introduction to Steve Fuller’s Social Epistemology. Lexington Books. ISBN 0-7391-0667-8
Rimkutė, Audronė (2014-09-28). "The Problem of Social Knowledge in Contemporary Social Epistemology: Two Approaches". Problemos (in Lithuanian). 0 (65): 4–19. doi:10.15388/Problemos.2004.65.6645. ISSN 1392-1126.
Schmitt, Frederick F. 1994. Socializing Epistemology. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0-8476-7959-4
Schmitt, Frederick F.; Scholz, Oliver R. (2010-02-01). "Introduction: The History of Social Epistemology". Episteme. 7 (1): 1–6. doi:10.3366/E174236000900077X. ISSN 1750-0117.
Solomon, Miriam. 2001. Social Empricism. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-19461-9

External links[edit]

Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Social Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Social epistemology at PhilPapers
Social epistemology at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
The journal Social Epistemology







v
t
e


Epistemology



Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Roger Gibson
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Bertrand Russell
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle





Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism





Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...





Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology








Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Pre-modern
philosophers



Aquinas
Aristotle
Averroes
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Al-Ghazali
Han Fei
Laozi
Marsilius
Mencius
Mozi
Muhammad
Plato
Shang
Socrates
Sun Tzu
Thucydides





Modern
philosophers



Bakunin
Bentham
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Comte
Emerson
Engels
Fourier
Franklin
Grotius
Hegel
Hobbes
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marx
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Nietzsche
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire





20th–21th-century
Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Azurmendi
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Judith Butler
Camus
Chomsky
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Foucault
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Irigaray
Kirk
Kropotkin
Lenin
Luxemburg
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Michels
Mises
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Simonović
Skinner
Sombart
Spann
Spirito
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force












v
t
e


Science and technology studies



Economics



Economics of science
Economics of scientific knowledge





History



History and philosophy of science
History of science

and technology


History of technology





Philosophy



Antipositivism
Empiricism
Fuzzy logic
Philosophy of science
Philosophy of social science
Philosophy of technology
Positivism
Postpositivism
Social constructivism
Social epistemology





Sociology



Actor–network theory
Social

construction of technology
shaping of technology


Sociology of knowledge

scientific


Sociology of scientific ignorance
Sociology of the history of science
Sociotechnology
Strong programme





Science
studies



Antiscience
Bibliometrics
Boundary-work
Consilience
Demarcation problem
Double hermeneutic
Mapping controversies
Paradigm shift
Pseudoscience
Science

citizen
communication
education
normal
post-normal
rhetoric
wars


Scientific

method
consensus
controversy
enterprise
misconduct


Scientometrics
Team science
Traditional knowledge

ecological


Unity of science
Women in science

STEM







Technology
studies



Coproduction
Cyborg anthropology
Digital anthropology
Dematerialization
Early adopter
Hype cycle
Innovation

diffusion
disruptive
linear model
system
user


Leapfrogging
Normalization process theory
Reverse salient
Skunkworks project
Sociotechnical system
Technical change
Technoscience

feminist


Technological

change
convergence
determinism
revolution
transitions


Technology

and society
critique of
dynamics
theories of
transfer


Engineering studies
Women in engineering





Policy



Digital divide
Evidence-based policy
Factor 10
Science policy

history of
science of


Politicization of science
Regulation of science
Research ethics
Socio-scientific issues
Technology assessment
Technology policy
Transition management








 Portals

Science
History of science
Technology
Sociology


 Category

Associations
Journals
Scholars












Categories: Social epistemologyInterdisciplinary subfields of sociologyEpistemologyPhilosophy of scienceSocial philosophyHidden categories: CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt)CS1 errors: external linksPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URL