Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting
For fifteenth century Dutch and Flemish painting, see Early Netherlandish painting.




The Fall of Icarus, now considered a copy of Pieter Bruegel the Elder


Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting represents the 16th century response to Italian Renaissance art in the Low Countries. These artists, who span from the Antwerp Mannerists and Hieronymus Bosch at the start of the 16th century to the late Northern Mannerists such as Hendrik Goltzius and Joachim Wtewael at the end, drew on both the recent innovations of Italian painting and the local traditions of the Early Netherlandish artists. Antwerp was the most important artistic centre in the region. Many artists worked for European courts, including Bosch, whose fantastic painted images left a long legacy. Jan Mabuse, Maarten van Heemskerck and Frans Floris were all instrumental in adopting Italian models and incorporating them into their own artistic language. Pieter Brueghel the Elder, with Bosch the only artist from the period to remain widely familiar, may seem atypical, but in fact his many innovations drew on the fertile artistic scene in Antwerp.
Dutch and Flemish painters were also instrumental in establishing new subjects such as landscape painting and genre painting. Joachim Patinir, for example, played an important role in developing landscape painting, inventing the compositional type of the world landscape, which was perfected by Pieter Bruegel the Elder who, followed by Pieter Aertsen, also helped popularise genre painting. From the mid-century Pieter Aertsen, later followed by his nephew Joachim Beuckelaer, established a type of "monumental still life" featuring large spreads of food with genre figures, and in the background small religious of moral scenes. Like the world landscapes, these represented a typically "Mannerist inversion" of the normal decorum of the hierarchy of genres, giving the "lower" subject matter more space than the "higher".[1] Anthonis Mor was the leading portraitist of the mid-century, in demand in courts all over Europe for his reliable portraits in a style that combined Netherlandish precision with the lessons of Titian and other Italian painters.




Hell, the right panel from the triptych The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch






Cornelis Aerentsz van der Dussen by Jan van Scorel (c. 1535) Panel, Weiss Gallery, London





Contents


1 Stylistic evolution
2 Painters
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Stylistic evolution[edit]
Italian Renaissance influences begin to show on Early Netherlandish painting around 1500, but in many ways the older style was remarkably persistent. Antwerp Mannerism is a term for painters showing some Italian influence, but mainly continuing the style and subjects of the older masters. Hieronymus Bosch is a highly individual artist, whose work is strange and full of seemingly irrational imagery, making it difficult to interpret.[2] Most of all it seems surprisingly modern, introducing a world of dreams that seems more related to Gothic art than the Italian Renaissance, although some Venetian prints of the same period show a comparable degree of fantasy. The Romanists were the next phase of influence, adopting Italian styles in a far more thorough way.
After 1550 the Flemish and Dutch painters begin to show more interest in nature and beauty "in itself", leading to a style that incorporates Renaissance elements, but remains far from the elegant lightness of Italian Renaissance art,[3] and directly leads to the themes of the great Flemish and Dutch Baroque painters: landscapes, still lifes and genre painting - scenes from everyday life.[2]
This evolution is seen in the works of Joachim Patinir and Pieter Aertsen, but the true genius among these painters was Pieter Brueghel the Elder, well known for his depictions of nature and everyday life, showing a preference for the natural condition of man, choosing to depict the peasant instead of the prince.
The Fall of Icarus (now in fact considered a copy of a Brueghel work), although highly atypical in many ways, combines several elements of Northern Renaissance painting. It hints at the renewed interest for antiquity (the Icarus legend), but the hero Icarus is hidden away in the background. The main actors in the painting are nature itself and, most prominently, the peasant, who does not even look up from his plough when Icarus falls. Brueghel shows man as an anti-hero, comical and sometimes grotesque.[3]
Painters[edit]


History of Dutch and Flemish painting


Early Netherlandish  (1400–1523)


Renaissance painting  (1520–1580)


Northern Mannerism  (1580–1615)


Dutch "Golden Age" painting  (1615–1702)


Flemish Baroque painting  (1608–1700)


List of Dutch painters


List of Flemish painters



Pieter Aertsen
Simon Bening
Hieronymus Bosch
Pieter Brueghel the Elder
Pieter Brueghel the Younger
Joachim Beuckelaer
Joos van Cleve
Pieter Coecke van Aelst
Hieronymus Cock
Corneille de Lyon
Hans Eworth
Frans Floris
Maarten van Heemskerck
Caterina van Hemessen
Jan Sanders van Hemessen
Adriaen Isenbrant
Jan Mabuse van Gosaert
Anthonis Mor
Lucas van Leyden
Lambert Lombard
Quentin Matsys
Jan Mostaert
Bernard van Orley
Joachim Patinir
Frans Pourbus the Elder
Pieter Pourbus
Jan Provoost
Marinus van Reymerswaele
Jan van Scorel
Levina Teerlinc
Jacob van Utrecht

See also[edit]

Renaissance in the Netherlands
Northern Renaissance

Notes[edit]


^ Snyder, 409-412, 432-445
^ a b Janson, H.W.; Janson, Anthony F. (1997). History of Art (5th, rev. ed.). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN 0-8109-3442-6. 
^ a b Heughebaert, H.; Defoort, A.; Van Der Donck, R. (1998). Artistieke opvoeding. Wommelgem, Belgium: Den Gulden Engel bvba. ISBN 90-5035-222-7. 


References[edit]

Snyder, James. Northern Renaissance Art, 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0-13-623596-4

Further reading[edit]

Orenstein, Nadine M., ed. (2001). Pieter Bruegel the Elder: Drawings and Prints. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 978-0-87099-990-1. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Northern Renaissance paintings.









v
t
e


Renaissance



General



Renaissance
High Renaissance
12th century
Early modern Europe





By field



Architecture
Art
Dance
Latin
Literature
Magic
Medicine
Music
Philosophy
Science
Technology
Theatre
Warfare





By region



Bengali
English
Flemish
French
German
Italian
Northern
Papacy
Polish
Portugal
Scotland
Spain





Lists



Composers
Figures
Structures





See also



Nuclear renaissance
Medieval renaissances










Categories: Renaissance in the Low CountriesRenaissance artDutch artFlemish artNetherlandish Renaissance artNorthern RenaissanceNetherlandish artHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCommons category without a link on Wikidata