Handstand




An acro dancer pauses in a precision handstand before handwalking across the stage.


A handstand is the act of supporting the body in a stable, inverted vertical position by balancing on the hands. In a basic handstand the body is held straight with arms and legs fully extended, with hands spaced approximately shoulder-width apart. There are many variations of handstands, but in all cases a handstand performer must possess adequate balance and upper body strength.
Handstands are performed in many athletic activities, including acro dance, cheerleading, circus, yoga, and gymnastics. Some variation of handstand is performed on every gymnastic apparatus, and many tumbling skills pass through a handstand position during their execution. Breakdancers incorporate handstands in freezes and kicks. Armstand dives—a category found in competitive platform diving—are dives that begin with a handstand. In games or contests, swimmers perform underwater handstands with their legs and feet extended above the water.
Handstands are known by various other names. In yoga, the handstand is known as Adho Mukha Vrksasana[1] translating to Downward-facing Tree Pose. In capoeira it is named bananeira.
Gymnastics[edit]
There are two basic handstand styles in modern gymnastics: curved-back and straight-back.[2] Straight-back style is employed when the aesthetics of straight body lines are desired and feasible. In many cases (e.g., when a handstand is being performed in conjunction with a gymastic apparatus), however, the curved-back style is preferred as it offers superior control over balance. In all cases, balance is maintained by shifting body weight towards the fingers or the heel of the hand.
All basic gymnastic handstands have these characteristics:

Straight arms with hands placed on the ground approximately shoulder-width apart.
Straight legs, held together.
Pointed toes so as to continue the lines of the legs.

In addition, straight-back handstands have these characteristics:

Tucked head (face pointed forward) as if standing upright.
Straight spine, with hips pushed forward. If performed while lying flat, this would cause the small of the back to contact ground.

Breakdance[edit]
Handstand "freezes" are common in breakdance, in which dancers strive to assume visually interesting body shapes that are not subject to formal rules.
Variations[edit]
Common handstand variations include:

Straight legs held in a side or front split.
Stag split, in which legs are front split with bent knees.
Back extremely arched, with bent knees and toes touching the back of the head.
Hollowback, with hyperextension of the back so that legs go further forward than the head.
One-handed, in which only one hand contacts the ground.
Handstand pushups, in which one raises and lowers the body while standing inverted on the hands.








A capoeirista performs a handstand with bent legs








Handstand with front-split legs








One-armed handstand with straddle split








One-armed handstand with legs together








eagle-handstand-pose





Risk[edit]
Blood pressure in the head increases to abnormally high levels when the body is inverted. When one is inverted for extended periods, the prolonged high blood pressure may exacerbate preexisting medical conditions and increase the risk of stroke, pulmonary oedema, and other ailments.[3]
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Handstand.



Hand balancing
Hand walking
Head stand
List of asanas

References[edit]



^ Budilovsky, Joan; Adamson, Eve (2000). The complete idiot's guide to yoga (2 ed.). Penguin. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-02-863970-3. Retrieved 11 April 2011. 
^ "Different Styles of Handstands". Retrieved 2010-09-29. 
^ "Is it harmful to be upside down?". news.bbc.co.uk. 24 September 2008. Retrieved April 2012.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)









v
t
e


Asanas




Kriya•Mudra•Pranayama•Surya Namaskara•Asana



Arm balance



Ashtavakrasana





Uttihista Sthiti (Standing)



Ardha Chandrasana
Malasana





Purva Pratana Sthiti (Backbend)



Chakrasana
Uttanapadasana





Sitting



Navasana





other



Adho Mukha Shvanasana
Eka pada prasaranasana
Anantasana
Anjaneyasana
Ardha Matsyendrasana
Akarna Dhanurasana
Adho Mukha Vrkshasana
Baddha Konasana
Bakasana
Balasana
Bharadvajasana
Bhekasana
Bhujangasana
Bhujapidasana
Dandasana
Chaturanga Dandasana
Dhanurasana
Dvi Pada Viparita Dandasana
Eka Pada Kaundinyasana I
Eka Pada Kaundinyasana II
Eka Pada Viparita Dandasana
Garbhasana
Garudasana
Gomukhasana
Halasana
Hanumanasana
Hasta Uttanasana
Janushirshasana
Karnapidasana
Kakasana
Kapotasana
Kukkutasana
Kurmasana
Lolasana
Makarasana
Matsyasana
Mayurasana
Natarajasana
Padahastasana
Padmasana
Parivrtta trikonasana
Paschimottanasana
Pashasana
Pavanamuktasana
Rajakapotasana
Shalabhasana
Samakonasana
Sarvangasana
Shavasana
Siddhasana
Simhasana
Shirshasana
Sukhasana
Supta Virasana
Svastikasana
Tadasana
Trikonasana
Tulasana
Urdhva Hastasana
Urdhva mukha shvanasana
Ushtrasana
Utkatasana
Uttana Shishosana
Uttanasana
Utthita Parsvakonasana
Utthita Trikonasana
Vajrasana
Virasana
Virabhadrasana I
Virabhadrasana II
Virabhadrasana III
Viparita Karani
Vrksasana










Categories: Gymnastics manoeuvresHuman positionsAsanasAcro dance movesHidden categories: CS1 errors: dates