Development studies
Development studies is an interdisciplinary branch of social science. Development studies is offered as a specialized master's degree in a number of universities, and, less commonly, as an undergraduate degree. It has grown in popularity as a subject of study since the early 1990s, and has been most widely taught and researched in the third world and in countries with a colonial history, such as the UK, where development studies originated.[1] Students of development studies often choose careers in international organisations such as the United Nations, World Bank, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), private sector development consultancy firms, corporate social responsibility (CSR) bodies and research centers.



Contents


1 Professional bodies
2 Disciplines of development studies
3 History
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Professional bodies[edit]
Throughout the world, a number of professional bodies for development studies have been founded:[2]

Europe: European Association of Development Research and Training Institutes (EADI)
Latin America: Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencias Sociales (CLACSO)
Asia: Asian Political and International Studies Association (APISA)
Africa: Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa (CODESRIA) and Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa (OSSREA)
Arabic world: Arab Institutes and Centers for Economic and Social Development Research (AICARDES)

The common umbrella organisation of these association is the Inter-regional Coordinating Committee of Development Associations (ICCDA). In the UK and Ireland, the Development Studies Association is a major source of information for research on and studying in development studies. Its mission is to connect and promote those working on development research.
Disciplines of development studies[edit]
Development issues include:


Area studies
Community development
Demography
Development communication
Development theory
Diaspora studies
Ecology
Economic development
Engineering
Environmental studies
Extension studies
Geography
Gender studies
Human rights
Queer studies
Human security
Industrial relations
Industrialization
International development
International relations
Migration studies
Peace and conflict studies
Pedagogy
Political philosophy
Population studies
Public administration
Public health
Rural development
Social policy
Social development
Social work
Sustainable development
Urban studies
Women's studies


History[edit]
The emergence of development studies as an academic discipline in the second half of the twentieth century is in large part due to increasing concern about economic prospects for the third world after decolonisation. In the immediate post-war period, development economics, a branch of economics, arose out of previous studies in colonial economics. By the 1960s, an increasing number of development economists felt that economics alone could not fully address issues such as political effectiveness and educational provision.[3] Development studies arose as a result of this, initially aiming to integrate ideas of politics and economics. Since then, it has become an increasingly inter- and multi-disciplinary subject, encompassing a variety of social scientific fields.[4] In recent years the use of political economy analysis- the application of the analytical techniques of economics- to try and assess and explain political and social factors that either enhance or limit development has become increasingly widespread as a way of explaining the success or failure of reform processes. The era of modern development is commonly deemed to have commenced with the inauguration speech of Harry S. Truman in 1949.[5] In Point Four of his speech, with reference to Latin America and other poor nations, he said:

More than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more prosperous areas. For the first time in history, humanity possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the suffering of these people.[6]

But development studies has since also taken an interest in lessons of past development experiences of Western countries. More recently, the emergency of human security – a new, people-oriented approach to understanding and addressing global security threats – has led to a growing precognitions of a relationship between security and development. Humans security argues that inequalities and insecurity in one state or region have consequences for global security and that it is thus in the interest of all states to address underlying development issues. This relationship with studies of human security is but one example of the interdisciplinary nature of development studies.
See also[edit]


Sustainable development portal



Global South Development Magazine
Colonization
Community development
Development (disambiguation)
Development Cooperation Issues 
Development Cooperation Stories 
Development Cooperation Testimonials 
Economic development
Human rights
Human security
Industrialization
International development
Social development
Social work
Sustainable development
World-systems theory

References[edit]


^ Kothari, U. (ed), A Radical History of Development Studies: Individuals, Institutions and Ideologies – but see The Journal of Peasant Studies 34/1 (2007) for an alternative view.
^ About ICCDA
^ Kothari, U. (ed), A Radical History of Development Studies: Individuals, Institutions and Ideologies
^ Abbott, Lewis F. (2003) Theories of Industrial Modernization and Enterprise Development: A Review. ISR/Google Books, Second revised edition ISBN 978-0-906321-26-3
^ Rist, G., The History of Development: From Western Origins to Global Faith
^ "Address by Harry S. Truman, 1949". Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies. 


Further reading[edit]

Breuer, Martin. "Development" (2015). University Bielefeld - Center for InterAmerican Studies.
Pradella, Lucia and Marois, Thomas, eds. (2015) Polarizing Development: Alternatives to Neoliberalism and the Crisis. Pluto Press.

External links[edit]

Global South Development Magazine
Development Studies Internet Resources
Studying Development – International Development Studies course directory







v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity










Categories: Development studiesHidden categories: Pages using div col with deprecated parameters