Euthenics
Not to be confused with Eugenics.
Euthenics /juːˈθɛnɪks/ is the study of the improvement of human functioning and well-being by improvement of living conditions.[1] Affecting the "improvement" through altering external factors such as education and the controllable environment, including the prevention and removal of contagious disease and parasites, environmentalism, education regarding employment, home economics, sanitation, and housing.[2]
Rose Field notes of the definition in a May 23, 1926 New York Times article, "the simplest being efficient living".[3] A right to environment.[4]
The Flynn effect has been often cited as an example of euthenics. Another example is the steady increase in body size in industrialized countries since the beginning of the 20th century.
Euthenics is not normally interpreted to have anything to do with changing the composition of the human gene pool by definition, although everything that affects society has some effect on who reproduces and who does not.[5]



Contents


1 Origin of the term
2 History

2.1 Vassar College Institute of Euthenics
2.2 Elmira College
2.3 Today


3 Vs. eugenics
4 Debate, misconceptions and opposition
5 Quotations
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Origin of the term[edit]




Ellen Swallow Richards, the first female student and instructor at MIT.


The term was derived in the late 19th century from the Greek verb eutheneo, εὐθηνέω (eu, well; the, root of τίθημι tithemi, to cause).
(To be in a flourishing state, to abound in, to prosper.—Demosthenes. To be strong or vigorous.—Herodotus. To be vigorous in body.—Aristotle.[6])
Also from the Greek Euthenia, Εὐθηνία. Good state of the body: prosperity, good fortune, abundance.—Herodotus.[6]
The opposite of Euthenia is Penia, Πενία ("deficiency" or "poverty") the personification of poverty and need.[7]
History[edit]
Ellen H. Swallow Richards (1842–1911; Vassar Class of '70) was one of the first writers to use the term, in The Cost of Shelter (1905), with the meaning "the science of better living".[2][8] It is unclear if (and probably unlikely that) any of the study programs of euthenics ever completely embraced Richards' multidisciplinary concept, though several nuances remain today, especially that of interdisciplinarity.
Vassar College Institute of Euthenics[edit]




Julia Clifford Lathrop as the first chief of the U.S. Children's Bureau.


After Richards' death in 1911, Julia Lathrop (1858–1932; VC '80)—one of Vassar's most distinguished alumnae—continued to promote the development of an interdisciplinary program in euthenics at the college. Lathrop soon teamed with alumna Minnie Cumnock Blodgett (1862–1931; VC '84), who with her husband, John Wood Blodgett, offered financial support to create a program of euthenics at Vassar College. Curriculum planning, suggested by Vassar president Henry Noble MacCracken in 1922, began in earnest by 1923, under the direction of Professor Annie Louise Macleod (Chemistry; First woman PhD, McGill University, 1910).[9]
According to Vassar's chronology entry for March 17, 1924, "the faculty recognized euthenics as a satisfactory field for sequential study (major). A Division of Euthenics was authorized to offer a multidisciplinary program [radical at the time] focusing the techniques and disciplines of the arts, sciences and social sciences on the life experiences and relationships of women. Students in euthenics could take courses in horticulture, food chemistry, sociology and statistics, education, child study, economics, economic geography, physiology, hygiene, public health, psychology and domestic architecture and furniture. With the new division came the first major in child study at an American liberal arts college."[10]
For example, a typical major in child study in euthenics includes introductory psychology, laboratory psychology, applied psychology, child study and social psychology in the Department of Psychology; the three courses offered in the Department of Child Study; beginning economics, programs of social reorganization and the family in Economics; and in the Department of Physiology, human physiology, child hygiene, principles of public health.[11]
The Vassar Summer Institute of Euthenics accepted its first students in June 1926. Created to supplement the controversial euthenics major which began February 21, 1925, it was also located in the new Minnie Cumnock Blodgett Hall of Euthenics (York & Sawyer, architects; ground broke October 25, 1925). Some Vassar faculty members (perhaps emotionally upset with being displaced on campus to make way, or otherwise politically motivated) contentiously "believed the entire concept of euthenics was vague and counter-productive to women's progress."[12]
Having overcome a lukewarm reception, Vassar College officially opened its Minnie Cumnock Blodgett Hall of Euthenics in 1929.[9] Dr. Ruth Wheeler (Physiology and Nutrition – VC '99) took over as director of euthenics studies in 1924. Wheeler remained director until Mary Shattuck Fisher Langmuir (VC '20) succeeded her in 1944, until 1951.[12]
The college continued for the 1934–35 academic year its successful cooperative housing experiment in three residence halls. Intended to help students meet their college costs by working in their residences. For example, in Main, students earned $40 a year by doing relatively light work such as cleaning their rooms.[13]
In 1951, Katharine Blodgett Hadley (VC '20) donated $400,000, through the Rubicon Foundation, to Vassar to help fund operating deficits in the current and succeeding years and to improve faculty salaries.[14]
"Discontinued for financial reasons, the Vassar Summer Institute for Family and Community Living, founded in 1926 as the Vassar Summer Institute of Euthenics, held its last session, July 2, 1958. This was the first and last session for the institute's new director, Dr. Mervin Freedman."[15]
Elmira College[edit]
Elmira College is noted as the oldest college still in existence which (as a college for women) granted degrees to women which were the equivalent of those given to men (the first to do so was the now-defunct Mary Sharp College).[16] Elmira College became coeducational in all of its programs in 1969.
A special article was written in the December 12, 1937 New York Times, quoting recent graduates of Elmira College, urging for courses in colleges for men on the care of children. Reporting that "preparation for the greatest of all professions, that of motherhood and child-training, is being given the students at Elmira College in the Nursery School which is Conducted as part of the Department of Euthenics."[17]
Elmira College was one of the first of the liberal arts colleges to recognize the fact that women should have some special training, integrated with the so-called liberal studies, which would prepare them to carry on, with less effort and fewer mistakes, a successful family life. Courses in nutrition, household economics, clothing selection, principles of foods and meal planning, child psychology, and education in family relations are a part of the curriculum.[17]
The Elmira College nursery school for fifteen children between the ages of two and five years was opened primarily as a laboratory for college students, but it had become so popular with parents in the community that there was always a long waiting list.[17]
The New York Times article notes how the nursery had become one of the essential laboratories of the college, where recent mothers testified to the value of the training they received while in college. "Today," one graduate said, "when it is often necessary for young women to continue professional work outside the home after marriage, it is important that young fathers, who must share in the actual care and training of the children, should have some knowledge of correct methods."[17]
Today[edit]
Many factors led to the movement never getting the funding it needed to remain relevant, including: vigorous debate about the exact meaning of euthenics, a strong antifeminism movement paralleling even stronger women's rights movements, confusion with the term eugenics, the economic impact of the Great Depression and two world wars. These factors also prevented the discipline from gaining the attention it needed to put together a lasting, vastly multidisciplinary curriculum. Therefore, it split off into separate disciplines. Child Study is one such curriculum.
Martin Heggestad of the Mann Library notes that "Starting around 1920, however, home economists tended to move into other fields, such as nutrition and textiles, that offered more career opportunities, while health issues were dealt with more in the hard sciences and in the professions of nursing and public health. Also, improvements in public sanitation (for example, the wider availability of sewage systems and of food inspection) led to a decline in infectious diseases and thus a decreasing need for the largely household-based measures taught by home economists."[18] Thus, the end of euthenics as originally defined by Ellen Swallow Richards ensued.
Vs. eugenics[edit]
According to Ellen Richards, in her book Euthenics: the science of controllable environment (1910):[6]

The betterment of living conditions, through conscious endeavor, for the purpose of securing efficient human beings, is what the author means by Euthenics.
"Human vitality depends upon two primary conditions—heredity and hygiene—or conditions preceding birth and conditions during life."
Eugenics deals with race improvement through heredity.
Euthenics deals with race improvement through environment.
Eugenics is hygiene for the future generations.
Euthenics is hygiene for the present generation.
Eugenics must await careful investigation.
Euthenics has immediate opportunity.
Euthenics precedes eugenics, developing better men now, and thus inevitably creating a better race of men in the future. Euthenics is the term proposed for the preliminary science on which Eugenics must be based.

Debate, misconceptions and opposition[edit]




Lester Frank Ward






Abraham Flexner, c. 1895.






Margaret Sanger, 1922






Charles Benedict Davenport, ca. 1929


Debate over misconceptions about the movement started almost from the beginning. In his comparison "Eugenics, Euthenics, And Eudemics", (American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 18, No. 6, May 1913), Lester F. Ward of Brown University opens the second section regarding euthenics lamenting:

Is there, then, nothing to do? Are we to accept that modem scientific fatalism known as laissez faire, which enjoins the folding of the arms? Are we to preach a gospel of inaction? I for one certainly am not content to do so, and I believe that nothing I have thus far said [about eugenics] is inconsistent with the most vigorous action, and that in the direction of the betterment of the human race. The end and aim of the eugenists cannot be reproached. The race is far from perfect. Its condition is deplorable. Its improvement is entirely feasible, and in the highest degree desirable. Nor do I refer merely to economic conditions, to the poverty and misery of the disinherited classes. The intellectual state of the world is deplorable, and its improvement is clearly within the reach of society itself. It is therefore a question of method rather than of principle that concerns us.

Ward later noted about the organic environment that:

Darwin has taught us that the chief barrier to the advance of any species of plants or animals is its competition with other plants and animals that contest the same ground. And therefore the fiercest opponents of any species are the members of the same species which demand the same elements of subsistence. Hence the chief form of relief in the organic world consists in the thinning-out of competitors. Any species of animals or plants left free to propagate at its normal rate would overrun the earth in a short time and leave no room for any other species. Any species that is sufficiently vigorous to resist its organic environment will crowd out all others and monopolize the earth. If nature permitted this there could be no variety, but only one monotonous aspect devoid of interest or beauty. Whatever we may think of the harsh method by which this is prevented, we cannot regret that it is prevented, and that we have a world of variety, interest, and aesthetic attractiveness.

Vassar historians note that "critics faulted the new program as a weakening of science and a slide into vocationalism. The influential educator and historian of education, Abraham Flexner—one of the founders of the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study—attacked the program, along with other “ad hoc” innovations like intercollegiate athletics and student governments, in Universities, American, English, German (1930)."[10]


“

"Well, what is euthenics? Euthenics is the 'science of efficient living;' and the 'science' is artificially pieced together of bits of mental hygiene, child guidance, nutrition, speech development and correction, family problems, wealth consumption, food preparation, household technology, and horticulture.... The institute is actually justified in an official publication by the profound question of a girl student who is reported as asking, 'What is the connection of Shakespeare with having a baby?' The Vassar Institute of Euthenics bridges this gap!"

”


In the summer of 1926, Margaret Sanger created a stir when she gave a radio address, called "Racial Betterment", in the first Euthenics Institute, where she praised attempts to "close our gates to the so-called 'undesirables'" and proposed efforts to "discourage or cut down on the rapid multiplication of the unfit and undesirable at home", by government-subsidized voluntary sterilization. (from The Selected Papers of Margaret Sanger, vol. 1 (2003), Esther Katz, ed.)
Eugenicist, Charles Benedict Davenport, noted in his article "Euthenics and Eugenics," found reprinted in the Popular Science Monthly of January 1911, page 18, 20:[19]

Thus the two schools of euthenics and eugenics stand opposed, each viewing the other unkindly. Against eugenics it is urged that it is a fatalistic doctrine and deprives life of the stimulus toward effort. Against euthenics the other side urges that it demands an endless amount of money to patch up conditions in the vain effort to get greater efficiency. Which of the two doctrines is true?
The thoughtful mind must concede that, as is so often the case where doctrines are opposed, each view is partial, incomplete and really false. The truth does not exactly lie between the doctrines; it comprehends them both. What a child becomes is always the resultant of two sets of forces acting from the moment the fertilized egg begins its development—one is the set of internal tendencies and the other is the set of external influences. What the result of an external influence—a particular environmental condition—shall be depends only in part upon the nature of the influence; it depends also upon the internal nature of the reacting protoplasm.
Incest, cousin marriage, the marriage of defectives and tuberculous persons, are, in wide circles, taboo. This fact affords the basis for the hope that, when the method of securing strong offspring, even from partially defective stock—and where is the strain without any defect?—is widely known, the teachings of science in respect even to marriage matings will be widely regarded and that in the generations to come the teachings and practice of euthenics will yield greater result because of the previous practice of the principles of eugenics.

In a New York Times op-ed dated October 24, 1926, entitled "Eugenics and euthenics",[4] in response to an op-ed entitled "Bright Children Who Fail"[20] which appeared the previous October 15, student of child psychology, Joseph A. Krisses observes:


“
From intensive study we realize the importance of eugenics—the right of birth, and also the subject of euthenics—the right to environment. Too little credit is given to environment when we speak of children having hereditary traits as "Like father, like son," or "Chip off the old block." Such phrases have their origin from the study of eugenics. No one has ever taken an Edwards baby and reared it in a Jukes environment.
”


Quotations[edit]






This page is a candidate to be copied to Wikiquote using the Transwiki process. If the page can be expanded into an encyclopedic article, rather than a list of quotations, please do so and remove this message.




"Not through chance, but through increase of scientific knowledge; not through compulsion, but through democratic idealism consciously working through common interests, will be brought about the creation of right conditions, the control of the environment." (Ellen H. Swallow Richards)[6]


"Right living conditions comprise pure food and a safe water supply, a clean and disease free atmosphere in which to live and work, proper shelter and adjustment of work, rest, and amusements." (Ellen H. Swallow Richards)[2][6]


"Probably not more than twenty-five percent in any community are capable of doing a full days work such as they would be capable of doing if they were in perfect health" (Ellen H. Swallow Richards)[2][6]


"Men ignore nature's laws in their personal lives. They crave a larger measure of goodness and happiness, and yet in their choice of dwelling places, in their building of houses to live in, in their selection of food and drink, in their clothing of their bodies, in their choice of occupations and amusements, in their methods and habits of work, they disregard natural laws and impose upon themselves conditions that make their ideals of goodness and happiness impossible of attainment." (George E. Dawson, The control of life through Environment)[2][6]


"It is within the power of every living man to rid himself of every parasitic disease." (Louis Pasteur)[2][6]

See also[edit]


Critical thinking
Dysgenics
Ecology
Educational attainment in the United States
Environment and intelligence
Eudaimonia
Eugenics
Euphenics
Fertility and intelligence
Flynn effect
Home economics
Impact of health on intelligence
The Jukes family
The Kallikak family
Population health
Social design


References[edit]


^ "Euthenics". thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 23 August 2013. 
^ a b c d e f "Define Euthenics". askdefine.com. Retrieved 23 August 2013. 
^ Feld, Rose C. (1926-05-23). "VASSAR GIRLS TO STUDY HOME-MAKING AS CAREER; New Course in Euthenics, the Science of Human Betterment, Will Adjust Women to the Needs of Today and Act As a Check on Spread of Divorce" (pdf). www.nytimes.com. NY Times. Retrieved 11 September 2013. 
^ a b Krisses, Joseph A. (1926-10-24). "Eugenics and euthenics" (pdf). www.nytimes.com. NY Times. Retrieved 11 September 2013. 
^ "Definitions for Euthenics". definitions.net. Retrieved 23 August 2013. 
^ a b c d e f g h Richards, Ellen H. Swallow (1912) [1910]. Euthenics: The Science of Controllable Environment : A Plea for Better Conditions As a First Step Toward Higher Human Efficiency (2nd ed.). Boston: Whitcomb & Barrows. ISBN 0405098278. 
^ Theoi Project - Penia
^ Grandy, John K. (2006). Birx, H.J., ed. Euthenics. Encyclopedia of Anthropology. 5 Vols. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications. doi:10.4135/9781412952453. ISBN 9781412952453. 
^ a b Vassar Historian. "The Disappointing First Thrust of Euthenics". vcencyclopedia.vassar.edu. Archived from the original on 27 January 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ a b Vassar Historian. "A Division of Euthenics was authorized to offer a multidisciplinary program focusing the techniques and disciplines of the arts, sciences and social sciences on the life experiences and relationships of women. - A Documentary Chronicle of Vassar College". chronology.vassar.edu. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ *Lockwood, Helen Drusilla (1929). The Meaning of Euthenics; An Essay on Action as a Tool of Knowledge. Poughkeepsie, NY: Vassar College. 
^ a b Vassar Historian. "The Vassar Summer Institute". vcencyclopedia.vassar.edu. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ Vassar Historian. "The college announced the trustees' decision to continue for the 1934-35 academic year this year's successful cooperative housing experiment in three residence halls. - A Documentary Chronicle of Vassar College". chronology.vassar.edu. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ Vassar Historian. "President Blanding announced a $400,000 gift to the college from the chair of the board of trustees, Katharine Blodgett Hadley '20, through the Rubicon Foundation. - A Documentary Chronicle of Vassar College". chronology.vassar.edu. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ Vassar Historian. "Discontinued for financial reasons, the Vassar Summer Institute for Family and Community Living, founded in 1926 as the Vassar Summer Institute of Euthenics, held its last session. - - A Documentary Chronicle of Vassar College". chronology.vassar.edu. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 
^ Harwarth, Irene; DeBra, Elizabeth; Maline, Mindi (1997). Women's Colleges in the United States: History, Issues And, Challenges. National Institute on Postsecondary Education, Libraries, and Lifelong Learning, U.S. Dept. of Education. Retrieved 11 September 2013 – via Google Books. 
^ a b c d NY Times (12 December 1937). "MOTHERHOOD STUDY STRESSED AT ELMIRA; Recent Graduate Urges Courses in Colleges for Men on the Care of Children". www.nytimes.com. NY Times. Retrieved 11 September 2013. 
^ HEARTH Library-Cornell University
^ Davenport, Charles Benedict (January 1911). "Euthenics and Eugenics". Popular Science Monthly. New York. 78: 16–20. Retrieved September 2, 2013. 
^ New York Times Editorial (1926-10-16). "Bright Children Who Fail" (pdf). www.nytimes.com. NY Times. Retrieved 11 September 2013. 


Further reading[edit]

Chronologically listed



Richards, Ellen H. Swallow (1905). The Cost of Shelter (1st ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons; [etc.] ISBN 1414230125. 


Ward, Lester F. (1913). Eugenics, Euthenics, and Eudemics. Chicago: American Journal of Sociology. pp. 737–754. 


University of Minnesota, General College (c. 1934). Euthenics: Home Management, the House, Textiles, Food and Nutrition. Minneapolis: s.n. p. 174. 


Conklin, Edwin Grant (1935). Freedom and Responsibility: A Biographical View of Some Problems of Democracy. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. 


Dixon, Maloise Sturdevant (1936). Fundamentals in Personal Euthenics. Minneapolis, Minn: Burgess publishing company, Mimeoprint and photo offset publishers. 


Gurley, Jack (1962). Euthenics Can Assure Peace, and John's Rare Date. New York: Graphic Press. OCLC 17988501. 


Whipple, Dorothy Vermilya (1966). Dynamics of Development; Euthenic Pediatrics. New York: McGraw-Hill. 648pp. LCCN 65019094. OCLC 05128017. 


Weigley, Emma (January 1974). "It Might Have Been Euthenics: The Lake Placid Conference and the Home Economics Movement". American Quarterly. New York. 26: 79–96. doi:10.2307/2711568. 
Vassar Historian. "The Disappointing First Thrust of Euthenics". vcencyclopedia.vassar.edu. Archived from the original on 27 January 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 




Adapted from Daniels, Elizabeth A. (1994). Bridges to the World, Henry Noble MacCracken and Vassar College (1st ed.). Clinton Corners, NY: College Avenue Press. ISBN 1883551021. 




Dominguez, Juan Bautista (2011). "Blodgett structure reveals history of VC euthenics". admin.collegepublisher.com. Miscellany News. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2013. 


External links[edit]

Find more aboutEuthenicsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Data from Wikidata



"Euthenics" search query OCLC - WorldCat







v
t
e


Euthenics




the philosophy of and activism for Euthenics



Concepts



Accountability
Consumerism
Critical thinking
Ecology
Education
Environment
Food safety
Health
Household
Housekeeping
Life skills
Personal life
Sanitation
Social responsibility





Activism



Consumer activism
Consumer education
Consumer movement
Environmentalism
Social movements





Fields of study



Air quality
Bioethics
Botany
Chemistry
Child development
Cleaning
Ecology
Economics
Education
Employment
Euthenics
Food science
Health
Health education
Health policy
Health promotion
Health research
Health sciences
Home
Home economics
Housing
Hygiene
Industrial relations
Life
Nutrition
Organisms
Prevention
Psychology
Public health
Quality of life
Sanitation
Self care
Social programs
Social sciences
Society
Water treatment





Key players



Ellen Swallow Richards
Julia Lathrop
Minnie Cumnock Blodgett
Melvil Dewey












v
t
e


Consumerism




the philosophy of and activism for consumer protection



Concepts



Consumerism
Consumer
Anti-consumerism
Consumer capitalism
Consumer privacy
Consumer protection
Consumer revolution
Ethical consumerism
Informed consumer





Activism



Consumer activism
Consumer Bill of Rights
Consumer complaint
Consumer education
Consumer Movement
Collaborative consumption
United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection





Fields of study



Consumer math
Euthenics
Home economics





Key players



Consumer organizations

list


Consumers' Association
Ellen Swallow Richards
Ralph Nader
Esther Peterson












v
t
e


Public health



General



Auxology
Biological hazard
Chief Medical Officer
Cultural competence
Deviance
Environmental health
Euthenics
Genomics
Globalization and disease
Health economics
Health literacy
Health policy

Health system
Health care reform
Public health law


Maternal health
Medical anthropology
Medical sociology
Mental health
Pharmaceutical policy
Public health laboratory
Reproductive health
Social psychology
Sociology of health and illness





Preventive healthcare



Behavior change

Theories


Family planning
Health promotion
Human nutrition
Preventive nutrition
Hygiene

Food safety
Hand washing
Infection control
Oral hygiene


Occupational safety and health

Human factors and ergonomics
Hygiene
Injury prevention
Medicine
Nursing


Patient safety

Organization


Pharmacovigilance
Safe sex
Sanitation

Emergency
Fecal–oral transmission
Open defecation
Sanitary sewer
Waterborne diseases


Smoking cessation
Vaccination
Vector control





Population health



Biostatistics
Child mortality
Community health
Epidemiology
Global health
Health impact assessment
Health system
Infant mortality
Open-source healthcare software
Public health informatics
Social determinants of health

Health equity
Race and health


Social medicine





Biological and
epidemiological statistics



Case-control study
Randomized controlled trial
Relative risk
Statistical hypothesis testing

Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Regression analysis
ROC curve
Student's t-test
Z-test


Statistical software





Infectious and epidemic
disease prevention



Asymptomatic carrier
Epidemics

List


Notifiable diseases

List


Public health surveillance

Disease surveillance


Quarantine
Sexually transmitted infection
Tropical disease
Vaccine trial





Food hygiene and
safety management



Food

Additive
Chemistry
Engineering
Microbiology
Processing
Safety
Safety scandals


Genetically modified food
Good agricultural practice
Good manufacturing practice

HACCP
ISO 22000







Health behavioral
sciences



Diffusion of innovations
Health belief model
Health communication
Health psychology
Positive deviance
PRECEDE-PROCEED model
Social cognitive theory
Social norms approach
Theory of planned behavior
Transtheoretical model





Organizations,
education
and history




Organizations



Europe

Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety


India

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare


U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
City and county health departments
Council on Education for Public Health
Public Health Service


World Health Organization
World Toilet Organization





Education



Health education
Higher education

Bachelor of Science in Public Health
Doctor of Public Health
Professional degrees of public health
Schools of public health







History



Sara Josephine Baker
Samuel Jay Crumbine
Carl Rogers Darnall
Joseph Lister
Margaret Sanger
John Snow
Typhoid Mary
Germ theory of disease
Social hygiene movement











 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla  (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Social and environmental accountability



Ethics and
principles



Aarhus Convention
Corporate accountability / behaviour / social responsibility
Ethical banking
Ethical code
Extended producer responsibility
Organizational ethics
Organizational justice
Principles for Responsible Investment
Social responsibility
Stakeholder theory
Sullivan principles
Transparency (behavioral
social)
UN Global Compact








Social
accounting



Double bottom line
Ethical Positioning Index
Higg Index
Impact assessment (environmental
equality
social)
ISO 26000
ISO 45001
Genuine progress indicator
Performance indicator
SA8000
Social return on investment
Whole-life cost





Environmental
accounting



Carbon accounting
Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
Emission inventory
Environmental full-cost accounting / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account
ISO 14000
ISO 14031:1999
Life-cycle assessment
Pollutant release and transfer register
Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain
Toxics Release Inventory
Triple bottom line





Reporting



Global Reporting Initiative
GxP guidelines
Sustainability reporting





Auditing



Community-based monitoring
Environmental (certification)
Fair trade (certification)
ISO 19011





Related



Bangladesh Accord
Benefit corporation
Child labour
Community interest company
Conflict of interest
Disasters
Disinvestment
Eco-labeling
Environmental pricing reform
Environmental, social and corporate governance
Ethical consumerism
Euthenics
Health impact assessment
Market governance mechanism
Product certification
Public participation
Social enterprise
Socially responsible investing
Stakeholder (engagement)
Supply chain management








 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Organizations










Categories: EuthenicsHygienePublic healthQuality of lifeSanitationHidden categories: Copy to WikiquotePages using div col without cols and colwidth parametersPages using Columns-list with deprecated parametersPages using div col with deprecated parameters