Game of skill






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Chess is a game of skill, as it features no elements of chance


A game of skill is a game where the outcome is determined mainly by mental or physical skill, rather than by chance. Some commonly played games of skill include: chess, poker, collectible card games, contract bridge, backgammon, and mahjong.
However, most games of skill also involve a degree of chance, due to natural aspects of the environment, a randomizing device (such as dice, playing cards or a coin flip) or guessing due to incomplete information. Some games of skill such as poker may involve bluffing and other forms of psychological warfare.
Legal meaning[edit]
The distinction between "chance" and "skill" has legal significance in countries where chance games are treated differently from skill games. The legal distinction is often vague and varies widely from one jurisdiction to the next.
On associating Rummy, another game of skills, with gambling in 1968, Supreme Court said, "Rummy requires certain amount of skill because the fall of the cards has to be memorised and the building up of Rummy requires considerable skill in holding and discarding cards. We cannot, therefore, say that the game of Rummy is a game of entire chance. It is mainly and preponderantly a game of skill. The chance in Rummy is of the same character as the chance in a deal at a game of bridge." The decision was challenged in Supreme Court and the final verdict came in August 2015, calling Rummy a game of skills, including web portals like RummyCircle.[1]
In a number of countries like Germany, whether a game is considered of skill has legal implications with respect to whether money bets on the game's outcome are considered gambling or not. For example, poker is legally considered a game of chance in Germany (thus only allowed in casinos), whereas skat is considered a game of skill and competitions with money prizes are allowed.[2]
See also[edit]


Games portal



Casino game
Mind sport
List of types of games
Memory sport
Strategy game

References[edit]



^ "Skill Games under Indian laws". RummyCircle. Archived from the original on 2016-08-12. 
^ A. C. Spapens; Toine Spapens; Alan Littler; Cyrille Fijnaut (2008). Crime, Addiction and the Regulation of Gambling. BRILL. p. 143. ISBN 978-90-04-17218-0. 









v
t
e


Types of games






Chance
Guessing
Party
Role-playing
Skill
Sport
Strategy
Street
Tabletop
Video






List of types of games







Authority control



GND: 4388795-8










Categories: Game terminologySkillsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2009All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers