Wilfrid Sellars


Wilfrid Sellars


Born
Wilfrid Stalker Sellars
(1912-05-20)May 20, 1912
Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.


Died
July 2, 1989(1989-07-02) (aged 77)
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.


Education
University of Michigan (BA, 1933)
University at Buffalo (MA, 1934)[1]
Oriel College, Oxford (BA, 1936; MA, 1940)





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Analytic
Critical realism (philosophy of perception)


Institutions
University of Pittsburgh


Academic advisors
Marvin Farber[2]
Thomas Dewar Weldon


Doctoral students
Jay Rosenberg
Paul Churchland
Robert Kane


Other notable students
Fred Dretske



Main interests

Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of perception
Epistemology
Meaning
Pragmatism
Behaviorism
History of philosophy



Notable ideas

Critical realism (philosophy of perception)
Criticism of foundationalist epistemology (the "Myth of the Given")
psychological nominalism
Kantian empiricism[3][1]
The distinction between the 'manifest' and the 'scientific' image




Influences


Gilbert Ryle, Rudolf Carnap, Immanuel Kant, Roy Wood Sellars, Edmund Husserl,[2] Clarence Irving Lewis[4]








Influenced


Robert Brandom, Paul Churchland, John McDowell, Richard Rorty, Daniel Dennett, Bas van Fraassen, Ruth Millikan, Annette Baier, Jay Rosenberg









Wilfrid Stalker Sellars (May 20, 1912 – July 2, 1989) was an American philosopher and prominent developer of critical realism,[5] who "revolutionized both the content and the method of philosophy in the United States".[6]



Contents


1 Life and career
2 Philosophical contributions

2.1 Works

2.1.1 "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind"
2.1.2 "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man"




3 Founder of cooperative housing for students
4 Legacy
5 Bibliography
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Life and career[edit]
His father was the Canadian-American philosopher Roy Wood Sellars, a leading American philosophical naturalist in the first half of the twentieth-century.[7] Wilfrid was educated at the University of Michigan (BA, 1933), the University at Buffalo, and Oriel College, Oxford (1934–1937), where he was a Rhodes Scholar, obtaining his highest earned degree, an MA, in 1940. During World War II, he served in military intelligence. He then taught at the University of Iowa (1938–1946), the University of Minnesota (1947–1958), Yale University (1958–1963), and from 1963 until his death, at the University of Pittsburgh.[8] He served as president of the Metaphysical Society of America in 1977.
Sellars is well known as a critic of foundationalist epistemology—the "Myth of the Given" as he called it.[9] However, his philosophical works are more generally directed toward the ultimate goal of reconciling intuitive ways of describing the world (both those of common sense and traditional philosophy) with a thoroughly naturalist, scientific account of reality. He is widely regarded both for great sophistication of argument and for his assimilation of many and diverse subjects in pursuit of a synoptic vision. Sellars was perhaps the first philosopher to synthesize elements of American pragmatism with elements of British and American analytic philosophy and Austrian and German logical positivism. His work also reflects a sustained engagement with the German tradition of transcendental idealism, most obviously in his book Science and Metaphysics: Kantian Variations.
Philosophical contributions[edit]
Sellars coined certain now-common idioms in philosophy, such as the "space of reasons". This idiom refers to two things. It:

Describes the conceptual and behavioral web of language that humans use to get intelligently around their world,
Denotes the fact that talk of reasons, epistemic justification, and intention is not the same as, and cannot necessarily be mapped onto, talk of causes and effects in the sense that physical science speaks of them.

(2) corresponds in part to the distinction Sellars makes between the manifest image and the scientific image.
Works[edit]
"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind"[edit]
Sellars' most famous work is the lengthy and difficult paper, "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" (1956).[10] In it, he criticises the view that knowledge of what we perceive can be independent of the conceptual processes which result in perception. He named this "The Myth of the Given," attributing it to phenomenology and sense-data theories of knowledge.
The work targets several theories at once, especially C. I. Lewis' Kantian pragmatism and Rudolf Carnap's positivism. He draws out "The Myth of Jones," to defend the possibility of a strict behaviorist worldview. The parable explains how thoughts, intelligent action, and even subjective inner experience can be attributed to people within a scientific model. Sellars used a fictional tribe, "Ryleans," since he wanted to address Gilbert Ryle's The Concept of Mind.
Sellar's idea of "myth," heavily influenced by Ernst Cassirer, is not necessarily negative. He saw it as something that can be useful or otherwise, rather than true or false. He aimed to unite the conceptual behavior of the "space of reasons" with the concept of a subjective sense experience. This was one of his most central goals, which his later work described as Kantian.
"Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man"[edit]
In his "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man" (1962), Sellars distinguishes between the "manifest image" and the "scientific image" of the world.
The manifest image includes intentions, thoughts, and appearances. Sellars allows that the manifest image may be refined through 'correlational induction', but he rules out appeal to imperceptible entities.
The scientific image describes the world in terms of the theoretical physical sciences. It includes notions such as causality and theories about particles and forces.
The two images sometimes complement one another, and sometimes conflict. For example, the manifest image includes practical or moral claims, whereas the scientific image does not. There is conflict, e.g. where science tells us that apparently solid objects are mostly empty space. Sellars favours a synoptic vision, wherein the scientific image takes ultimate precedence in cases of conflict, at least with respect to empirical descriptions and explanations.[11]
Founder of cooperative housing for students[edit]
As a student at the University of Michigan, Wilfrid Sellars was one of the founding members of the first North-American cooperative house for university students, which was then called "Michigan Socialist House" (and which was later renamed "Michigan Cooperative House").[12]
Legacy[edit]
Robert Brandom, his junior colleague at Pittsburgh, named Sellars and Willard Van Orman Quine as the two most profound and important philosophers of their generation. Sellars' goal of a synoptic philosophy that unites the everyday and scientific views of reality is the foundation and archetype of what is sometimes called the "Pittsburgh School," whose members include Brandom, John McDowell, and John Haugeland.[13]
Other philosophers strongly influenced by Sellars span the full spectrum of contemporary English-speaking philosophy, from neopragmatism (Richard Rorty) to eliminative materialism (Paul Churchland) to rationalism (Laurence BonJour). Sellars' philosophical heirs also include Ruth Millikan, Hector-Neri Castaneda, Bruce Aune, Jay Rosenberg, Johanna Seibt, Matthew Burstein, Ray Brassier, Andrew Chrucky, Jeffrey Sicha, Pedro Amaral, Thomas Vinci, Willem A. de Vries, David Rosenthal, Ken Wilber and Michael Williams. Sellar's work has been drawn upon in feminist standpoint theory, for example in the work of Rebecca Kukla.[14]
Sellars' death in 1989 was the result of long-term alcoholism.[15] A collection of essays devoted to 'Sellars and his Legacy' was published by Oxford University Press in 2016 (ed., James O'Shea), with contributions from Brandom, deVries, Kraut, Kukla, Lance, McDowell, Millikan, O'Shea, Rosenthal, Seibt, and Williams.
Bibliography[edit]

Pure Pragmatics and Possible Worlds-The Early Essays of Wilfrid Sellars, [PPPW], ed. by Jeffrey F. Sicha, (Ridgeview Publishing Co; Atascadero, CA; 1980). [Contains a long introductory essay by Sicha and an extensive bibliography of Sellars' work through 1979.]
Science, Perception and Reality, [SPR], (Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd; London, and The Humanities Press: New York; 1963) [Reissued in 1991 by Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA. This edition contains a complete bibliography of Sellars' published work through 1989.]
Philosophical Perspectives, [PP], (Charles C. Thomas: Springfield, IL; 1967). Reprinted in two volumes, Philosophical Perspectives: History of Philosophy and Philosophical Perspective: Metaphysics and Epistemology, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA; 1977).
Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes. [S&M], (Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd; London, and The Humanities Press; New York; 1968). The 1966 John Locke Lectures. [Reissued in 1992 by Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA. This edition contains a complete bibliography of Sellars' published work through 1989, a register of Sellars' philosophical correspondence, and a listing of circulated but unpublished papers and lectures.]
Essays in Philosophy and Its History, [EPH], (D. Reidel Publishing Co.; Dordrecht, Holland; 1975).
Naturalism and Ontology, [N&O], (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 1979). [An expanded version of the 1974 John Dewey Lectures]
The Metaphysics of Epistemology: Lectures by Wilfrid Sellars, edited by Pedro Amaral, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA; 1989). [Contains a complete bibliography of Sellars' published work through 1989.]
Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind [EPM*], edited by Robert Brandom, (Harvard University Press.; Cambridge, MA; 1997). [The original, 1956, version of [EPM] (see below), lacking footnotes added in [SPR], with an Introduction by Richard Rorty and Study Guide by Brandom.]
Kant and Pre-Kantian Themes: Lectures by Wilfrid Sellars, edited by Pedro Amaral, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 2002). [A transcription of Sellars' Kant lectures, plus essays on Descartes, Locke, Spinoza, and Leibniz.]
Kant's Transcendental Metaphysics: Sellars' Cassirer Lecture Notes and Other Essays, edited by Jeffrey F. Sicha, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 2002). [Contains a complete bibliography of Sellars' published work, philosophical correspondence, and circulated manuscripts through 2002.]

See also[edit]

American philosophy
List of American philosophers
transcendental empiricism

References[edit]



^ a b Wilfrid Sellars (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 Edition)
^ a b James R. O'Shea Wilfrid Sellars and His Legacy, Oxford University Press, 2016, p. 4.
^ Sellars' Kantian empiricism features a distinction between claims whose revision requires abandonment or modification of the system of concepts in terms of which they are framed and claims revisable on the basis of observations formulated in terms of a system of concepts which remained fixed throughout.
^ Hunter, Bruce, 2016 "Clarence Irving Lewis" in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
^ Willem deVries, 2014. "Wilfrid Sellars," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Aug. 11,
^ "A Philosopher Who Shattered Our Complacency". 15 August 1989 – via NYTimes.com. 
^ "Sellars, Roy Wood - Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. 
^ "Introduction to Wilfrid Sellars lecture, Naturalism and Ontology". 
^ deVries, Willem (30 June 2017). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ "EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND". ditext.com. 
^ Brassier, Ray, Nihil Unbound (2007) p.3
^ Jones, Jim (2007–2008). "Remembering the Mich House founders" (PDF). The Alumni Cooperator: A Publication of The Inter-Cooperative Council. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-Cooperative Council: 15. 
^ Chauncey Maher, The Pittsburgh School of Philosophy. Routledge. 2012.
^ Rebecca Kukla, "Objectivity and Perspective in Empirical Knowledge". Episteme 3(1): 80–95. 2006.
^ "Susanna Felder". www.ditext.com. 



Further reading[edit]

McDowell, John. Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1979.

External links[edit]

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Wilfrid Sellars – Willem deVries.
"Wilfrid Sellars: Philosophy of Mind". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Wilfrid Sellars web site. Includes complete bibliography of his writings, some readable online, and a list of the Ph.Ds he supervised.
Autobiographical Reflections.
Dictionary of the Philosophy of Mind – Wilfrid Sellars – Article by Christopher Gauker on Sellars' contributions to the philosophy of mind.
Finding Aid for the Wilfrid S. Sellars Archive at the University of Pittsburgh
Notre Dame Lectures 1969-1986 – Transcribed from recordings by Sellars' student Pedro Amaral.
The Wilfrid Sellars Society – Homepage of the Wilfrid Sellars Society.
Wilfrid Sellars L'immagine scientifica e l'immagine manifesta a cura di: Carlo Marletti, Giacomo Turbanti, Edizioni ETS 2013
Wilfrid S. Sellars Papers (Wilfrid S. Sellars Papers, 1899–1990, ASP.1991.01, Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh.)







v
t
e


Analytic philosophy



Philosophers



J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Nick Bostrom
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Patricia Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
James F. Conant
Alice Crary
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Cora Diamond
Michael Dummett
Paul Feyerabend
Antony Flew
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
Paul Grice
Ian Hacking
R. M. Hare
Carl Gustav Hempel
Peter van Inwagen
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
Thomas Kuhn
David Lewis
Alasdair MacIntyre
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Ernest Nagel
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
Alvin Plantinga
Karl Popper
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Richard Rorty
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Moritz Schlick
John Searle
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Richard Swinburne
Charles Taylor
Michael Walzer
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein





Theories



Actualism
Analytical feminism
Analytical Marxism
Anti-realism
Berlin Circle
Descriptivist theory of names
Emotivism
Functional contextualism
Linguistic turn
Logical positivism
Modal realism
Model-dependent realism
Neopragmatism
Neurophilosophy
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Pragmatic theory of truth
Verificationism
Vienna Circle





Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal / Deductive / epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation / reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning (Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind / projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid–flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction





Related articles



Aretaic turn
Australian realism
Communitarianism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy








 Index
 Category









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 88661525
LCCN: n50006855
ISNI: 0000 0001 0922 8130
GND: 118613049
SELIBR: 208354
SUDOC: 030542537
BNF: cb12006504n (data)
BIBSYS: 90081845
NDL: 00526060










Categories: 1912 births1989 deaths20th-century American philosophersUniversity of Pittsburgh facultyAmerican people of Canadian descentAnalytic philosophersKantian philosophersPragmatistsPhilosophers of mindPresidents of the Metaphysical Society of AmericaEpistemologistsUniversity of Michigan alumni20th-century historiansHidden categories: Articles with hCardsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers