Mazdak




Shahnameh illustration of the execution of Mazdak




 
Part of a series on Nizari-Ismāʿīli Batiniyya, Hurufiyya, Kaysanites and Twelver Shī‘ism

Alevism







Beliefs


Allah
Quran
Haqq–Muhammad–Ali
Prophet Muḥammad ibn `Abd Allāh
Muhammad-Ali
Islamic prophet
Zahir
Batin
Buyruks
Tariqat
Haqiqa
Marifat
Wahdat al-wujud
Wahdat al-mawjud
Baqaa
Fana
Haal
Ihsan
Kashf
Nafs
Keramat
Al-Insān al-Kāmil
Lataif
Four Doors
Manzil
Nûr
Sulook
Yaqeen
Devriye
Poetry
Cosmology
Philosophy
Psychology








Practices


Zakat
Zeyārat
Taqiyya
Ashura
Hıdırellez
Nowruz
Saya
Mawlid
Music
Düşkünlük Meydanı
Fasting
Müsahiplik








The Twelve Imams


Ali
Hasan
Husayn
al-Abidin
al-Baqir
al-Sadiq
al-Kadhim
ar-Rida
al-Taqi
al-Naqi
al-Askari
al-Mahdi








Leadership


Dede
Murshid
Pir
Rehber
Babas
Dergah
Jem
Cemevi








Crucial figures and influences


Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Fatimah
Khidr
Salman the Persian
Uwais al-Qarani
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Dhul-Nun al-Misri
Bayazid Bastami
Ibn al-Rawandi
Mansur Al-Hallaj
Nasir Khusraw
Abu al-Hassan al-Kharaqani
Yusuf Hamdani
Khoja Akhmet Yassawi
Abdul-Qadir Gilani
Ahmed ar-Rifa'i
Ibn Arabi
Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar
Ahi Evren
Haji Bektash Veli
Rumi
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Zahed Gilani
Sari Saltik
Yunus Emre
Safi-ad-din Ardabili
Nāimī
Sadr al-Dīn Mūsā
Imadaddin Nasimi
Shah Nimatullah Wali
Shaykh Junayd
Shaykh Haydar
Ali Mirza Safavi
Ismail I
Nur-Ali Khalifa
Kaygusuz Abdal
Otman Baba
Balım Sultan
Gül Baba
Fuzûlî
Alians
Demir Baba Teke
Arabati Baba Teḱe
Pir Sultan Abdal
Kul Nesîmî
Sheikh Bedreddin
Börklüce Mustafa
Torlak Kemal








Alevi history


Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam
Shia in Persia before Safavids
Shiism in Persia after Safavids
Umayyad Caliphate
Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Al-Muqanna
Ishaq al-Turk
Abbasid Caliphate
Babak Khorramdin
Maziar
Kaykhusraw II
Babai revolt
Baba Ishak
Celali rebellions
Bayezid II
Persecution of Alevis
Nur Ali Halife rebellion
Şahkulu Rebellion
Şahkulu
Battle of Chaldiran
Selim I
Abaza rebellion
Kuyucu Murad Pasha
Auspicious Incident
Mahmud II
Koçgiri Rebellion
Dersim Rebellion
Seyid Riza
Maraş Massacre
Çorum Massacre
Sivas Massacre
Gazi Quarter riots








Related Muslim tariqah


Malamatiyya
Qalandariyya
Qadiriyya
Akbari Sufis
Rifa'i
Uwaisi
Naqshbandi
Mevlevi Order
Zahediyeh
Safaviyya
Khalwati order
Bayramiye
Jelveti
Babai Revolt
Hurufism
Nuqtavi
Chepni people
Bektashi Order
Bektashism and folk religion
Jelali revolts
Ni'matullāhī
Arabati Baba Teḱe
Javad Nurbakhsh
Galibi Order








Other influential groups


Isma'ilism
Nizari
Alawites
Druze
Khurramites
Qizilbash
Bábism
Bahá'í Faith
Yazdanī
Yarsanism
Yazidi
Yazidis in Armenia
Sabians
Ishikism
Gnosticism
Nabataeans
Zoroaster
Zoroastrianism
Mazdak
Zurvanism
Mandaeism
Manichaeism
Shamanism
Tengrism
Panentheism






 Islam portal





v
t
e





Mazdak (Persian: مزدک‎, Middle Persian: , also Mazdak the Younger; died c. 524 or 528) was a Zoroastrian mobad (priest), Iranian reformer, prophet and religious activist who gained influence during the reign of the Sasanian emperor Kavadh I. He claimed to be a prophet of Ahura Mazda and instituted communal possessions and social welfare programs. He has been seen as a proto-socialist.[1]



Contents


1 Mazdakism

1.1 Origins
1.2 Theological tenets
1.3 Ethical and social principles


2 Followers
3 Opposition to and purge of Mazdak's adherents
4 Jewish tradition
5 Legacy
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Mazdakism[edit]
Mazdak was the chief representative of a religious and philosophical teaching called Mazdakism, which he viewed as a reformed and purified version of Zoroastrianism,[2][3] although his teaching has been argued to display influences from Manichaeism as well.[2] Zoroastrianism was the dominant religion of Sassanid Persia, and Mazdak himself was a mobad or Zoroastrian priest, but most of the clergy regarded his teaching as heresy. Information about it is scarce and details are sketchy, but some further details may be inferred from the later doctrine of the Khurramites, which has been seen as a continuation of Mazdakism.[2][4]
Origins[edit]
Some sources claim that the original founders of this sect lived earlier than Mazdak. These were another mobad, Zaradust-e Khuragen[5] (distinct from the founder of Zoroastrianism, Zoroaster, Middle Persian Zardusht) and/or a Zoroastrian philosopher known as Mazdak the Elder, who taught a combination of altruism and hedonism: "he directed his followers to enjoy the pleasures of life and satisfy their appetite in the highest degree with regard to eating and drinking in the spirit of equality, to aim at good deeds; to abstain from shedding blood and inflicting harm on others; and to practise hospitality without reservation".[2] This doctrine was further developed by the much better-known Mazdak the Younger, son of Bāmdād.
At later stages the conservative Zoroastrian opposition accused Mazdak's followers of heresy and with abhorrent practices such as the sharing of women, for which scholars have found no evidence. Mazdak's followers are considered to be the first real socialists in human history by their emphasis on community property and community work with benefits accruing to all.[1][6]
Theological tenets[edit]
Like both Zoroastrianism (at least as practised at the time) and Manichaeism, Mazdakism had a dualistic cosmology and worldview.[3] This doctrine taught that there were two original principles of the universe: Light, the good one; and Darkness, the evil one. These two had been mixed by a cosmic accident, tainting everything except God. Light is characterized by knowledge and feeling, and acts by design and free will, whereas Darkness is ignorant and blind, and acts at random. Mankind's role in this life was, through good conduct, to release the parts of himself that belonged to Light. But where Manichaeism saw the mixture of good and bad as a cosmic tragedy, Mazdak viewed this in a more neutral, even optimistic way.
In addition, Mazdakism is reported, in one late work, to have distinguished three elements (Fire, Water, Earth), and four Powers (Discernment, Understanding, Preservation and Joy, corresponding to the four chief officials of the Sassanid state – the Chief Mobad (Mobadan Mobad), the Chief Herbad, the Commander of the Army and the Entertainment Master), seven Viziers and twelve Spiritual Forces. When the Four, the Seven and the Twelve were united in a human being, he was no longer subject to religious duties. In addition, God was believed to rule the world through letters, which held the key to the Great Secret that should be learned. This description suggests that Mazdakism was, in many ways, a typical Gnostic sect.[7]
Ethical and social principles[edit]
Two distinguishing factors of Mazdak's teaching were the reduction of the importance of religious formalities—the true religious person being the one who understood and related correctly to the principles of the universe—and a criticism of the strong position of mainstream clergy, who, he believed, had oppressed the Persian population and caused much poverty.
Mazdak emphasised good conduct, which involved a moral and ascetic life, no killing and vegetarianism (which contained substances solely from Darkness), being kind and friendly and living in peace with other people.
In many ways Mazdak's teaching can be understood as a call for social revolution, and has been referred to as early "communism".[6] He and his followers were also advocates of free love.[8]
According to Mazdak, God had originally placed the means of subsistence on earth so that people should divide them among themselves equally, but the strong had coerced the weak, seeking domination and causing the contemporary inequality. This in turn empowered the "Five Demons" that turned men from Righteousness – these were Envy, Wrath, Vengeance, Need and Greed. To prevail over these evils, justice had to be restored and everybody should share excess possessions with his fellow men. Mazdak allegedly planned to achieve this by making all wealth common or by re-distributing the excess,[9] although it is unclear how he intended to organize that in terms of regulations and to what extent his position has been caricatured by hostile sources.[10] The hostile sources mostly dwell on the alleged "sharing" of women, the resulting sexual promiscuity and the confusion of the line of descent. Since the latter is a standard accusation against heretical sects, its veracity has been doubted by researchers; it is likely that Mazdak took measures against the widespread polygamy of the rich and lack of wives for the poor.[10]
Followers[edit]
Mazdak's teaching acquired many followers, to the point when even King Kavadh I, ruling from 488 until 531, converted to Mazdakism. He also reportedly sponsored its adoption by the Arab vassal kingdom of al-Hirah, entailing the deposing of the previous king al-Mundhir by the Kindite chief al-Harith.[11][12]
With the King's backing Mazdak could embark on a program of social reform, which involved pacifism, anti-clericalism and aid programs for helping the poor. Mazdak had government warehouses opened to help the poor. He also had all the Zoroastrian fire temples closed except the three major ones.
Opposition to and purge of Mazdak's adherents[edit]
Fear among the nobility and Zoroastrian clergy grew so strong that King Kavadh was overthrown in 496, but he managed to regain the throne three years later with the help of the Hephthalite Empire. Scared by the resistance among the powerful, he chose to distance himself from Mazdak. He allowed Anushiravan to launch a campaign against the Mazdakites in 524 or 528, culminating in a massacre of most of the adherents – including Mazdak himself – and restoring orthodox Zoroastrianism as the state religion.[6] Various fictionalized accounts[13] specify the manner of execution: for example, the Shahnameh states that 3000 Mazdakites were buried alive with the feet upwards in order to present Mazdak with the spectacle of a "human garden", whereas Mazdak himself was hanged upside down and shot with countless arrows; other stories specify other torturous methods of execution. Anushiravan then proceeded to implement his own far-reaching social and administrative reforms.[14] The Mazdakite ruler of al-Hirah was also overthrown[by whom?] and the previous king restored to power.
Jewish tradition[edit]
A Jewish tradition relates a slightly different story. The Exilarch of Babylon, Mar-Zutra II, rallied the Jewish community and their allies, who defeated Mazdak and established an independent Jewish kingdom in Mahoza that lasted for seven years[15] (495–502).
Legacy[edit]
A few Mazdakis survived, and settled in remote areas. Small pockets of Mazdakite societies are said to have survived for centuries after the Muslim conquest of Persia. Their doctrines probably mixed with radical currents of Shia Islam, influencing them and giving rise to later powerful revolutionary-religious movements in the region. The cult of al-Muqanna‘, who claimed to be the incarnation of God and had followers among the Mubaiyyidah sect of Zoroastrianism and even some Turks, upheld the laws and institutes of Mazdak.[16] In the 9th century, the Khurramites, an egalitarian religious sect possibly originating from Mazdakism, led a revolt under the leadership of Babak Khorramdin against the Abbasid Caliphate and successfully defended large territories against the Caliphate's forces for some twenty years.[17] The Batiniyya, Qarmatians and other later revolutionary currents of Islam may also be connected to Mazdakism and were often equated with it by contemporary authors.[18]
Turkish scholar Abdülbâkî Gölpınarlı sees even the Qizilbash of the 16th century – a radical Shi'i movement in Persia which helped the Safaviyya establish Twelver Islam as the dominant religion of Iran – as "spiritual descendants of the Khurramites" and, hence, of the Mazdakites.[19] "Mazdakist" eventually seems to have become a standard derogative label attached by pre-modern Persian and Arabic authors to any radical egalitarian movement in subsequent Iranian history.[20] While medieval Muslim historiography primarily focused on the "socialist" aspects of Mazdak, Zoroastrian tradition, on the other hand, remembers Mazdak above all as a dangerous heretic and enemy of the true faith (Zand-i Wahman yasn 2:1), a threat comparable to Mani and Muhammad (Denkard 3:345).
The author of the Dabestan-e Mazaheb, writing as late as the 17th century, claims to have met individual adherents of Mazdakism who practised their religion secretly among the Muslims and preserved the Desnad, a book in Middle Persian containing the teachings of Mazdak.[21][22]
See also[edit]

List of Persian figures in the Sasanian era
Mandaeism
Proto-Indo-Iranian religion
Yazdânism

Notes[edit]



^ a b Manfred, Albert Zakharovich, ed. (1974). A Short History of the World. 1. (translated into English by Katherine Judelson). Moscow: Progress Publishers. p. 182. OCLC 1159025. 
^ a b c d Yarshater, Ehsan (1983). Cambridge history of Iran The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian periods. 2. pp. 995–997. ISBN 978-0-521-24693-4. 
^ a b Shaki, Mansour. 1985. The cosmogonical and cosmological teachings of Mazdak. Papers in Honour of Professor Mary Boyce, Acta Iranica 25, Leiden, 1985, pp. 527–43.
^ Shaki, Mansour (1978). "The social doctrine of Mazdak in the light of middle Persian evidence". Archív Orientálni. 46 (4): 289–306. 
^ Esposito, John L. (2003). "Mazdakism". The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-19-512558-0. 
^ a b c Wherry, Rev. E. M. (1882). A Comprehensive Commentary on the Quran comprising Sale's translation and Preliminary Discourse. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. p. 66. 
^ Yarshater 1983, pp. 1007–1008
^ Rehatsek, Edward (1 January 1878). "Christianity in the Persian Dominions, from its beginning till the fall of the Sasanian dynasty". Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay. Asiatic Society of Bombay. 13: 75. 
^ Crone, Patricia (1991). "Kavad's Heresy and Mazdak's Revolt" (PDF). Iran (Journal of Persian Studies). British Institute of Persian Studies. 29: 21–40. 
^ a b Yarshater 1983, pp. 999–1000
^ Yarshater, Ehsan (1998). "The Persian presence in the Islamic world". In Hovannisian, Richard G.; Sabagh, Georges. The Persian Presence in the Islamic World. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 4–125, page 28. ISBN 978-0-521-59185-0. 
^ Khanam, R. 2005. Encyclopaedic ethnography of Middle-East and Central Asia: A–I: Volume 1. P.441
^ Yarshater 1983, p. 994
^ Yarshater 1983, p. 1022
^ "Babylonia", Encyclopaedia Judaica 
^ Al-Bīrūnī: Father of Comparative Religion
^ Yarshater 1983, pp. 1003–1004
^ Yarshater 1983, pp. 1022–1023
^ Roger M. Savory (ref. Abdülbâkî Gölpınarlı), Encyclopaedia of Islam, "Kizil-Bash", Online Edition 2005
^ Morgan David. 2007. The Mongols. p. 145
^ M.N. Dhalla: History of Zoroastrianism (1938), part 5.
^ Dabestan-e Mazaheb



References[edit]

H. Börm: Prokop und die Perser. Untersuchungen zu den römisch-sasanidischen Kontakten in der ausgehenden Spätantike. Stuttgart 2007, p. 230–233.
A. Christensen: Le règne du roi Kawadh et le communisme Mazdakite. Kopenhagen 1925.
P. Crone: "Kavad’s heresy and Mazdak’s revolt". In: Iran 29, 1991, p. 21–42.
H. Gaube: "'Mazdak: Historical reality or invention?" In: Studia Iranica 11, 1982, pp. 111–122.
G. Gnoli: "Nuovi studi sul Mazdakismo". In: Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (Hrsg.), La Persia e Bisanzio [Atti dei convegni Lincei 201]. Rom 2004, pp. 439–456.
Z. Rubin: "Mass Movements in Late Antiquity". In: I. Malkin/Z. Rubinsohn (Hrsg.), Leaders and Masses in the Roman World. Studies in Honor of Zvi Yavetz. Leiden/New York 1995, pp. 187–191.
W. Sundermann: "Neue Erkenntnisse über die mazdakitische Soziallehre". In: Das Altertum 34, 3, 1988, pp. 183–188.
Josef Wiesehöfer: Kawad, Khusro I and the Mazdakites. A new proposal. In: P. Gignoux u. a. (Hrsg.): Trésors d'Orient. Paris 2009, pp. 391–409.
Yarshater, Ehsan (1983). "Mazdakism". Cambridge History of Iran: The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian periods. 2. Cambridge. pp. 991–1024. 

External links[edit]

Religions of Iran: Mazdakism
Encyclopedia of Orient: Mazdakism
History of Zoroastrianism: Mazdak







v
t
e


Iranian peoples



Ethnic groups



Balochis
Gilaks
Kurds

Laks,Yazidi


Lurs

Bakhtiaris


Mazanderanis
Ossetians

Jaszs


Pamiris

Tajiks of Xinjiang


Pashtuns
Persians
Tajiks
Talyshis
Tats

Caucasus
Iran


Wakhis
Yaghnobis
Zazas





Ancient peoples



Ancient Iranian peoples





Origin



Indo-Iranians





Languages



Iranian languages





Iranian religions



Ætsæg Din
Bábism
Khurramites
Manichaeism
Mazdakism
Mazdaznan
Yarsanism
Yazdânism
Yazidism
Zoroastrianism









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 16991605
LCCN: no2007000776










Categories: 520s deaths5th-century Iranian people6th-century Iranian peopleAncient Persian philosophersFounders of religionsHeresyIranian prophetsIranian religionsPolitical philosophersReligion in IranZoroastrian philosophyHistory of ZoroastrianismPersian words and phrases6th century in religionReligious activistsReformersPeople executed by the Sasanian EmpireRebellions against the Sasanian EmpireZoroastrian priestsShahnameh charactersHidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyArticles containing Persian-language textArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersYear of birth unknown