Religious education
For an overview of religious education as taught in schools around the world, see religious education in primary and secondary education.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In secular usage, religious education is the teaching of a particular religion (although in England the term religious instruction would refer to the teaching of a particular religion, with religious education referring to teaching about religions in general) and its varied aspects: its beliefs, doctrines, rituals, customs, rites, and personal roles. In Western and secular culture, religious education implies a type of education which is largely separate from academia, and which (generally) regards religious belief as a fundamental tenet and operating modality, as well as a prerequisite for attendance.
The secular concept is substantially different from societies that adhere to religious law, wherein "religious education" connotes the dominant academic study, and in typically religious terms, teaches doctrines which define social customs as "laws" and the violations thereof as "crimes", or else misdemeanors requiring punitive correction.
The free choice of religious education by parents according to their conviction is protected by Convention against Discrimination in Education.[1]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Religious education by religion
3 Approaches in various regions

3.1 New Zealand
3.2 China
3.3 India
3.4 Japan
3.5 Pakistan
3.6 South East Asia
3.7 Europe

3.7.1 Austria
3.7.2 Finland
3.7.3 France
3.7.4 Germany
3.7.5 Greece
3.7.6 Latvia
3.7.7 Poland
3.7.8 Romania
3.7.9 Turkey
3.7.10 United Kingdom


3.8 North America

3.8.1 Canada
3.8.2 United States




4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Overview[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Since people within a given country often hold varying religious and non-religious beliefs, government-sponsored religious education can be a source of conflict. Countries vary widely in whether religious education is allowed in government-run schools (often called "public schools"). Those that allow it also vary in the type of education provided.
People oppose religious education in public schools on various grounds. One is that it constitutes a state sponsorship or establishment of whatever religious beliefs are taught. Others argue that if a particular religion is taught in school, children who do not belong to that religion will either feel pressure to conform or be excluded from their peers. Proponents argue that religious beliefs have historically socialized people's behavior and morality. They feel that teaching religion in school is important to encourage children to be responsible, spiritually sound adults.[2]
Religious education by religion[edit]
In Christianity, catechesis refers to the religious instruction of children and adult converts.
The Church Educational System of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) provides religious education for the youth and adults in 145 countries.[3]
In traditional Muslim education, children are taught to read and sometimes speak Arabic and memorize the major suras of the Qur'an. Many countries have state-run schools for this purpose (known as Madrasah Islamiyyah in Arabic; meaning "Islamic school"). Traditionally, a settlement may pay a mullah to teach children. There is a historic tradition of Sufi mullahs who wander and teach, and an ancient tradition of religious universities. However, the study of Islam does not suffice. Students must pass the state mandated curriculum to pass. Religious scholars often serve as judges, especially for criminal and family law (more rarely for commercial law).
Pertaining to Jewish religious education in a secular society, Michael Rosenak, an Israeli philosopher of Jewish education, asserts that even when non-religious Jewish educators insist that the instruction of Judaism is not only a religious matter, they agree that “the religious factor” was very important to its culture before secularism dawned on society, and that “an understanding of natural history and literature requires a sense of historical Jewish sensibility.[4]
Approaches in various regions[edit]
New Zealand[edit]
In New Zealand, "Religious Education" refers to the academic teaching of religious studies. "Religious Instruction" refers to religious faith teaching, which occurs in private religious schools, integrated (religious) state schools or sometimes within Secular NZ State Primary Schools if directed by the individual schools' Board of Trustees. In 2017 around 40% of NZ State Primary Schools carried our religious instruction classes. There are no officially recognised syllabuses as the school has to be officially closed in order to allow the classes to go ahead. There are organised groups such as the Secular Education Network[5][6] and the NZ Association of Rationalists and Humanists,[7] who are actively lobbying Government to have legislation changed to remove the classes from state primary schools.
China[edit]
In the People's Republic of China, formal religious education is permitted. Religious education usually occurs in scheduled sessions in private homes.[8][not in citation given] Religious teachers usually move on a weekly or monthly circuit, staying as guests in private houses in exchange for teaching.[citation needed]
India[edit]
See also: International Society for Krishna Consciousness
ISKCON
In India, there are a number of private schools run by religious institutions, especially for Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Jains and Buddhists. During the era of British rule, Christian private schools were quite prominent and widely attended by both UK (British) and Indian students. Many of the schools established during this era, especially in areas with a heavy Christian population, are still in existence today.
The school teaches academic education according to the standard UK curriculum, alongside devotional subjects of bhajan/kirtan singing and instrumentation and also Gaudiya Vaishnava philosophy.[9] ISKCON has instituted a number of seminaries and schools of tertiary higher education. In addition to typical formal education, ISKCON also offers specialized religious/spiritual instructional programs in scriptural texts, standardized by the ISKCON Ministry for Educational Development[10] and the GBC committee on Vaisnava Training & Education, categorized by level and difficulty; in India, they are primarily provided by the Mayapur Institute for Higher Education and Training[11] and the Vrindavan Institute for Higher Education.[12] ISKCON also offers instruction in archana, or murti worship and devotional ceremony, through the Mayapur Academy.[9]
In addition to regular formal education, a number of religious institutions have instituted regular informal religious/spiritual education programs for children and adults. ISKCON temples have established a number[clarification needed] of such
Japan[edit]
See also: List of schools in Japan
In Japan, there are many Christian schools and universities with mandatory religious education. Any religious education at private middle and high schools requires the teacher to be accredited by a university teaching the religious education standards.[13] Private schools with a traditional connection to Buddhist sects generally do not mandate any religious study. Religious or political education, or clubs that promote a specific religious or political group, are prohibited at public schools.
Pakistan[edit]
In Pakistan, Muslim students must take Islamic studies from primary to higher education. The subject is optional for non-Muslim students, who can choose the subject of ethics instead.
South East Asia[edit]
In Thailand, Burma and other majority Buddhist societies, Buddhist teachings and social decorum are sometimes taught in public school. Young men are expected to live as monks for several months at one time in their lives during which they can receive religious education.
Europe[edit]
Austria[edit]
Because of Austria's history as a multinational empire that included the largely Islamic Bosnia, Sunni Islam has been taught side by side with Roman Catholic, Protestant or Orthodox classes since the 19th century. However, children belonging to minority religions, like Jewish, Buddhist and Latter Day Saints also study religious education in their various denominations. At many schools, secular classes in Ethics can be attended alternatively.
Finland[edit]
In Finland religious education is mandatory subject both in comprehensive schools (7–16 years) and in senior/upper secondary schools (16-18/19 years). Most of Finnish students study Evangelical Lutheran religious education. A student can receive religious education according to his or her own religion if the denomination is registered in Finland. Since religious education is a compulsory subject, pupils who do not belong to any religious group are taught Ethics.[clarification needed] Also some non-Lutheran pupils participate in the Evangelical Lutheran religious education.[14]
France[edit]
In France, the state recognizes no religion and does not fund religious education. However, the state subsidizes private teaching establishments, including religious ones, under strict conditions of not forcing religion courses on students and not discriminating against students according to religion. An exception is the area of Alsace-Moselle where, for historical reasons (it was ruled by Germany when this system was instituted in the rest of France) under a specific local law, the state supports public education in some religions (Catholic, Protestant, Jewish) mostly in accord with the German model.[citation needed]
Germany[edit]
Historically, the various confessions in Germany have contributed to primary and secondary education and do so still. Education in Germany still embodies the legacy of the Prussian education system introduced by Frederick the Great in 1763. The curricula of the various states of Germany since then have included not only basic technical skills but also music (singing) and religious (Christian) education in close cooperation with the churches. This has led to the churches being assigned a specific status as legal entity of public law, "Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts" in Germany, which is a legacy of a 1919 Weimar compromise still in force today.[15]
Most of the federal states of Germany, which has a long history of almost even division between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism, have an arrangement whereby the religious bodies oversee the training of mainline Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish religious education teachers.
In one of the federal states this includes Orthodox Christian teachers as well. In Berlin, Bremen (see Bremen clause) and Brandenburg, religious education is not mandatory. E.g. in Bremen, state-authorized "Bible studies" were offered which were not supervised by a specific confession.
The training is supposed to be conducted according to modern standards of the humanities, and by teachers trained at mostly state-run colleges and universities. Those teachers teach religion in public schools, are paid by the state and are bound to the German constitution, as well as answerable to the churches for the content of their teaching. Children who are part of no mainstream religion (this applies e.g. to Jehovah's Witnesses and members of the New Apostolic Church) still have to take part in the classes of one of the confessions or, if they want to opt out, attend classes in Ethics or Philosophy instead. The Humanistischer Verband Deutschlands, an atheist and agnostic association, has adopted to the legal setup of the churches and is now allowed to offer such classes. From the age of 14, children may decide on their own if they want to attend religion classes and, if they do, which of those they are willing to attend. For younger children it is the decision of their parents. The state also subsidizes religious and Waldorf education schools by paying up to 90% of their expenses. These schools have to follow the same curricula as public schools of their federal state, though.
The introduction of Islamic religious education in Germany has faced various burdens and thresholds, but it is being introduced currently.[when?] While there are around three million Muslims, mostly of Turkish origin, now in the country (see Islam in Germany), not many of them are members of a legal entity with which the states could arrange such matters (unlike the Christian churches' representatives and the humanists). In 2013, for the first time in German history, the state of Hessen acknowledged a Muslim community, the reform-oriented Ahmadiyya, as Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts for all of Germany, which has been deemed a historical milestone.[16] Ahmadiyya applied for the status just to be able to offer religious education in state schools, but is allowed now to maintain its own cemeteries and have its members' fees collected by the state's church tax system.[16]
Greece[edit]
In Greece, students at public schools typically learn the basics of the Greek Orthodox faith. Students can opt out of these classes, if their parents state, in paper, that their children are not of the Greek Orthodox dogma.[17]
Latvia[edit]
In Latvia, since 2004 parents of the primary school students (grades 1 to 3) can choose Christian classes or the ethics. Christian classes are interdenominational (based on common Lutheran, Roman Catholic, Orthodox, Baptist, Old Believer grounds).
Poland[edit]
In Poland, religious education is optional in state schools. Parents decide whether children should attend religion classes or ethics classes[18][19] or none of them.[20] Since 2007, grades from religion (or ethics) classes are counted towards the grade point average.[citation needed]
Romania[edit]
Main article: Religious education in Romania
Religious education is optional in Romanian state schools. Parents can freely choose which religion their children will study, but a majority of religious classes focus on the Romanian Orthodox faith, which is the majority religion in the country.
Turkey[edit]
Institutional education in general, and religious education in particular, is centralized in Turkey. This approach began with the Unity of Education Law, which was first drafted in 1924 and preserved in subsequent legal reforms and constitutional changes. Due to the secular revolution, previous practices of the Ottoman education system were abandoned. The newer Unity of Education Law was interpreted as totally excluding religious instruction from public schools.[clarification needed]
In 1956, as a result of multiparty democracy, a new government led by the former Democratic Party was established. This new government introduced a religion course into secondary schools. After the military coup in 1980, religious education in school was transformed. The new program of the "Culture of Religion and Knowledge of Ethics" integrated the course with the purposes and principles of general education to educate students to be critical and active participants in the educational process.[21] The content of religious education is still prepared by the state.[22] The state ensures that children are first exposed to accepted interpretations of Islam before exposing them to other religious teachings.[23]
United Kingdom[edit]
In the United Kingdom, Catholic, Church of England (in England) and Jewish schools have long been supported within the state system, with all other schools having a duty to provide compulsory religious education. Until the introduction of the National Curriculum, religious education was the sole compulsory subject in state schools. State school religious education is non-proselytising and covers a variety of faiths, although the legislation requires it to include more Christian content than other faiths.[24] The Church of Scotland does not have schools, although it does often have a presence in Scottish non-denominational institutions. There is no National Curriculum for Religious Education in England. In England and Wales, the content of the syllabus is agreed on by local education authorities (LEAs), with the ratification of a Standing Advisory Council on Religious Education (SACRE) comprising members of different religious groups, teachers and local councillors. Parents can withdraw their children from all or part of the lessons on religious, sex and relationship education if they want.[25]
North America[edit]
Canada[edit]
In Canada, religious education has a varying status. On the one hand, publicly funded and organized separate schools for Roman Catholics and Protestants are mandated in some provinces and in some circumstances by various sections of the Constitution Act, 1867.[26] On the other hand, with a growing level of multiculturalism, particularly in Ontario, debate has emerged as to whether publicly funded religious education for one group is permissible. For example, Newfoundland withdrew funding for Protestant and Roman Catholic schools in 1995, after a constitutional amendment. Quebec abolished religious education funded by the state through the Education Act, 1998,[27] which took effect on July 1 of that same year, again after a constitutional amendment.[28] Quebec re-organized the schools along linguistic rather than religious lines. In Ontario, however, the move to abolish funding has been strongly resisted. In the 2007 provincial election, the topic of funding for faith-based schools that were not Catholic became a major topic. The provincial conservative party was defeated due, in part, to their support of this topic.
United States[edit]
In the United States, religious education is often provided through supplementary "Sunday school", "Hebrew school", or catechism classes, taught to children at their families' places of worship, either in conjunction with worship services or some other time during the week, after weekday school classes. Some families believe supplementary religious education is inadequate, and send their children to private religious schools, called parochial schools when they are affiliated with a specific parish or congregation. Many faiths also offer private college and graduate-level religious schools, which may be accredited as colleges. Under U.S. law, religious education is forbidden in public schools, except from a neutral, academic perspective.[29] For a teacher or school administration to endorse one religion is considered an infringement of the "establishment clause" of the First Amendment. The boundaries of this rule are frequently tested, with court cases challenging the treatment of traditional religious holidays, displays of religious articles and documents such as the Ten Commandments, the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance (which since 1954 has described the U.S. as "one nation under God"), and how prayer should be accommodated in the classroom.
See also[edit]


Religion portal
Education portal




Character education
Freedom of education
Private school
Parochial school
Islamic studies
Religion and children
Religious studies
Christian views on the classics
Tripiṭaka


References[edit]


^ Convention against Discrimination in Education, Article 5
^ Jackson, Robert (2014). Religion, Education, Dialogue and Conflict: Perspectives on Religious Education Research. Routledge.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "History of Seminary", seminary.lds.org.
^ Michael, Rosenak. Commandments and Concerns: Jewish Education in Secular Society. 2011. Jewish Publication Society.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Secular Education Network". Religion In Schools. Retrieved 15 March 2017. 
^ "Religious Instruction In NZ Primary Schools". Religious Education - Religious Instruction In NZ Primary Schools. Retrieved 15 March 2017. 
^ "NZ Association of Rationalists and Humanists". NZ Association of Rationalists and Humanists. Retrieved 15 March 2017. 
^ "China and Inner Asia Sessions". Aasianst.org. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ a b "Sri Mayapur International School". MayapurSchool.com. Retrieved 2011-06-22. 
^ "ISKCON Ministry for Educational Development". ISKCONEducation.com. Retrieved 2011-06-22. 
^ "Mayapur Institute for Higher Education and Training". MIHET.org. Retrieved 2011-06-15. 
^ "Vrindavan Institute for Higher Education". VIHE.org. Retrieved 2011-06-22. 
^ [中学校・高等学校教員（宗教）の免許資格を取得することのできる大学 http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shotou/kyoin/daigaku/detail/1287068.htm]
^ Administrator. "Religious Education in Finland". Retrieved 1 March 2016. 
^ Bedeutung und Voraussetzungen für den Erwerb des Status der Körperschaft öffentlichen Rechts für Religions- und Weltanschauungsgemeinschaften gem. Art. 140 GG in Verbindung mit Art. 137 Abs. 5 WRV (BMI Website of the German Ministry of Interior about of the legal background of the corporation status of religions and other World view associations)
^ a b Der Islam gehört nun offiziell zu Deutschland (Islam is a part of Germany now, quoting a famous speech of President Christian Wulff), by Freia Peters, Die Welt 2013
^ http://www.pi-schools.gr/lessons/religious/apallagi_thr.pdf "Ρύθμιση μαθητικών θεμάτων", Υπουργείο Εθν. Παιδείας & Θρησκευμάτων, 10/07/2008
^ http://www.cke.edu.pl/images/stories/pdf/ustawa_ujednolicona.pdf Art.12
^ http://www.poradnikdyrektora.pl/aktualnosci/organizowanie-zajec-z-etyki-dzu199236155-pozn-zm/
^ http://www.nauczaniefilozofii.uni.wroc.pl/pliki/podstawaprawna.pdf §3
^ "International Association for Religious Freedom". Retrieved 1 March 2016. 
^ "Religious education in Turkey - Worldbulletin News". World Bulletin. Retrieved 1 March 2016. 
^ Shively, R. L. (2008). page 702 Politeness and social interaction in study abroad: Service encounters in L2 Spanish. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
^ Religious Education Department for Education and Skills, QCA. p. 10. "The Education Act 1996 states that an agreed syllabus must reflect the fact that the religious traditions in Great Britain are in the main Christian, while taking account of the teachings and practices of the other principal religions represented in Great Britain."
^ "The National Curriculum - GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 2015-06-05. 
^ Constitution Act, 1867, s. 93; Alberta Act, S.C. 1905, c. 3, s. 17; Saskatchewan Act, S.C. 1905, c. 42, s. 17.
^ Education Act, R.S.Q., c. I-13.3, chap. 5, Division 1: Establishment of French Language and English Language School Boards
^ Constitution Act, 1867, s. 93A.
^ RELIGION AND THE COURTS: THE PILLARS OF CHURCH-STATE LAW The Pew Forum May 2007


Further reading[edit]

"Four Seventies Released", Ensign, November 1991.
The Association for Asian Studies. "Session 93: Chinese Lay Buddhists in the Early Twentieth Century and the Question of Secularization: Four Case Studies." Association for Asian Studies, Inc., Mar. 2009. Web. 29 Sept. 2009
"Faith in the System." Crown Copyright, 2007. Web. 29 Sept. 2009
Department of Education. "Overview of Governing Constitutional Principles." 15 Sept. 2003. Web. 29 Sept. 2009
A Cultural Study of Religious Education in America in Feng Chia Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences pp. 149–166, No.18, Jun. 2009, Author: Grace Hui Chin Lin

External links[edit]
 "Education, Moral". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920. 






v
t
e


Topics in alternative education






Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...











 Education Portal












v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla  (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Prophesy
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4049422-6
NDL: 00572407










Categories: Religious educationHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles needing additional references from April 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from March 2011All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from June 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2011Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers