Jim Cummins (professor)






This biographical article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this biographical article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (December 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Jim Cummins is a professor at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto where he works on language development and literacy development of learners of English as an additional language. In 1979 Cummins coined the acronyms BICS and CALP to refer to processes that help a teacher to qualify a student's language ability.
BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills)[edit]
Main article: Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills
BICS refers to the basic communicative fluency achieved by all normal native speakers of a language. It is cognitively undemanding and contextual and is better understood as the language used by students in informal settings, say, on a playground or cafe. Research by Cummins as well as Virginia Collier suggest that it typically takes language learners 1–3 years to develop BICS if they have sufficient exposure to the second language.
CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency/Academic Language Proficiency)[edit]
Main article: Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency
CALP refers to the ability to manipulate language using abstractions in a sophisticated manner. CALP is used while performing in an academic setting. CALP is the ability to think in and use a language as a tool for learning. Cummins's and Collier's research suggest that K-12 students need 5 to 7 years to acquire CALP in the second language if the learner has native language literacy. Learners who do not have strong native language literacy often need 7–10 years to acquire CALP in the second language.
External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Jim Cummins (professor)



Cummins's home page




Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 3394191
LCCN: n82085409
ISNI: 0000 0001 0864 0465
GND: 124000924
SUDOC: 03399823X
BNF: cb124798437 (data)










Categories: Canadian educational theoristsLiving peopleUniversity of Toronto facultyHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from December 2011All articles lacking reliable referencesBLP articles lacking sources from December 2011Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersPlace of birth missing (living people)