Ages of Man
This article is about mythological ages. For the "Seven Ages of Man" speech from Shakespeare's "As You Like It", see All the world's a stage. For the one-man show, see Ages of Man (play).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Lucas Cranach the Elder, The Golden Age


The Ages of Man are the stages of human existence on the Earth according to Greek mythology and its subsequent Roman interpretation.
Both Hesiod and Ovid offered accounts of the successive ages of humanity, which tend to progress from an original, long-gone age in which humans enjoyed a nearly divine existence to the current age of the writer, in which humans are beset by innumerable pains and evils. In the two accounts that survive from ancient Greece and Rome, this degradation of the human condition over time is indicated symbolically with metals of successively decreasing value.



Contents


1 Hesiod's Five Ages
2 Ovid's Four Ages
3 Related usage
4 See also
5 Notes
6 External links



Hesiod's Five Ages[edit]




Lucas Cranach the Elder, The Silver Age






Virgil Solis, The Iron Age


The first extant account of the successive ages of humanity comes from the Greek poet Hesiod (between 750 and 650 BC), in his poem Works and Days (lines 109–201). His list is:

Golden Age – The Golden Age is the only age that falls within the rule of Cronus. Created by the immortals who live on Olympus, these humans were said to live among the gods, and freely mingled with them. Peace and harmony prevailed during this age. Humans did not have to work to feed themselves, for the earth provided food in abundance. They lived to a very old age but with a youthful appearance and eventually died peacefully. Their spirits live on as "guardians". Plato in Cratylus (397e) recounts the golden race of men who came first. He clarifies that Hesiod did not mean men literally made of gold, but good and noble. He describes these men as daemons upon the earth. Since δαίμονες (daimones) is derived from δαήμονες (daēmones, meaning knowing or wise), they are beneficent, preventing ills, and guardians of mortals.
Silver Age – The Silver Age and every age that follows fall within the rule of Cronus's successor and son, Zeus. Men in the Silver age lived for one hundred years under the dominion of their mothers. They lived only a short time as grown adults, and spent that time in strife with one another. During this Age men refused to worship the gods and Zeus destroyed them for their impiety. After death, humans of this age became "blessed spirits" of the underworld.
Bronze Age – Men of the Bronze Age were hardened and tough, as war was their purpose and passion. Zeus created these humans out of the ash tree. Their armor was forged of bronze, as were their homes, and tools. The men of this Age were undone by their own violent ways and left no named spirits; instead, they dwell in the "dank house of Hades". This Age came to an end with the flood of Deucalion.
Heroic Age – The Heroic Age is the one age that does not correspond with any metal. It is also the only age that improves upon the age it follows. It was the heroes of this Age who fought at Thebes and Troy. This race of humans died and went to Elysium.
Iron Age – Hesiod finds himself in the Iron Age. During this age humans live an existence of toil and misery. Children dishonor their parents, brother fights with brother and the social contract between guest and host (xenia) is forgotten. During this age might makes right, and bad men use lies to be thought good. At the height of this age, humans no longer feel shame or indignation at wrongdoing; babies will be born with gray hair and the gods will have completely forsaken humanity: "there will be no help against evil."

Ovid's Four Ages[edit]
The Roman poet Ovid (1st century BC – 1st century AD) tells a similar myth of Four Ages in Book 1.89–150 of the Metamorphoses. His account is similar to Hesiod's, with the exception that he omits the Heroic Age. Ovid emphasizes the justice and peace that defined the Golden Age. He adds that in this age, men did not yet know the art of navigation and therefore did not explore the larger world, no man had knowledge of any arts but pre agriculture. In the Silver Age, Jupiter introduces the seasons and men consequentially learn the art of agriculture and architecture. In the Bronze Age, Ovid writes, men were prone to warfare, but not impiety. Finally, in the Iron Age, men demarcate nations with boundaries; they learn the arts of navigation and mining; they are warlike, greedy and impious. Truth, modesty and loyalty are nowhere to be found.
Related usage[edit]
These mythological ages are sometimes associated with historical timelines. In the chronology of Saint Jerome, the Golden Age lasts c. 1710 to 1674 BC, the Silver Age 1674 to 1628 BC, the Bronze Age 1628 to 1472 BC, the Heroic Age 1460 to 1103 BC, while Hesiod's Iron Age was considered as still ongoing by Saint Jerome in the 4th century AD.[1]
See also[edit]
Similar concepts include:

Christian: Six Ages of the World, Dispensationalism
Hindu: Yuga (Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali – during each successive Yuga, there is a general decline in the morality and values of society)
Mesoamerican: Five Suns
Giambattista Vico's ricorso: the return of the society to a relatively more primitive condition
JRR Tolkien's fictional "Four Ages"
Oswald Spengler's Civilizational model
Modern archaeology: Three-age system (Stone, Bronze and Iron), with each of the stages further divided into sub-stages (e.g. Stone Age comprises Paleolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic).
Marx's theory of history

Notes[edit]


^ St. Jerome. "St. Jerome, Chronicle (2004-5). Preface of Jerome; Preface of Eusebius". Tertullian.org. Retrieved 2012-11-16. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Myth of Ages.



Ages of Man - at Greek Mythology Link
Hesiod's Five Ages of Man - "The Five Ages of Man: Hesiod wrote about a Golden Age under Cronus" by N.S. Gill
Ages of Man. Goltzius Engravings from the De Verda collection
Theoi Project: Ages of Man







v
t
e


Timelines of religion



Christianity



Timeline
Bible

Ussher


English Reformation
Intelligent design
Jerusalem
Jesus
Joan of Arc
Missions
Mormonism

Book of Mormon


Eastern Orthodoxy in North America
Eastern Orthodoxy in Greece
Roman Catholic Church

Opus Dei


Syro-Malabar Catholic Church





Greek polytheism



Theogony
Chaos
Chronos
Prometheus (creator of humans)
Ages of Man





Islam



Muslim history
Jerusalem
Muslim presence in the Iberian Peninsula





Judaism



Jewish history
Hebrew Bible
Hebrew prophets
Jerusalem
Zionism
Antisemitism





Other religions



Ayyavazhi
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Hindu texts
Scientology
Zen Buddhism in the United States






Religion portal








Categories: Greek mythologyRoman mythologyHistoriographyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2014All articles needing additional references