Analytical feminism


Part of a series on


Feminism




Women
Girls
Femininity






History



Social




Feminist history
History of feminism



Women's history

American
British
Canadian
German







Timelines





Women's suffrage

Muslim countries
US





Other women's rights




Suffrage by country





Australia
Canada
Japan
Kuwait
New Zealand
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Wales


United States

In states

Utah









Waves





First
Second
Third
Fourth












Variants (general)



Analytical
Anarchist
Atheist
Conservative
Cultural
Cyber
Difference
Eco-

Vegetarian


Equality
Fat
French

French post-structuralist


Gender
Global
Hip-hop/Hip hop
Individualist
Jineology
Labor
Lesbian

Radical lesbians


Liberal

Equity


Lipstick
Marxist
Material
Maternal
Neo-
New
Post-
Postcolonial
Postmodern
Anti-abortion
Post-structural
Multicultural

Black
Chicana
White
Indigenous

Native American




Radical
Separatist
Sex-positive
Social
Socialist
Standpoint
Third world
Trans
Transnational
Womanism

Africana











Variants (religious)



Buddhist
Christian
Neopagan

Dianic Wicca
Reclaiming


Hindu
Islamic
Jewish

Orthodox


Mormon
Sikh









Concepts



Antifeminism
Bicycling
Criticism of marriage
Children's literature
Effects on society
Equality
Embedded feminism
Female education
Female genital mutilation
Femicide
Feminazi
Feminism in culture
Feminist stripper
Gender equality
Girl power
Honor killing
International Women's Day
Language reform
Male gaze
Matriarchal religion
Media
Men and feminism
Meninism
Movement

African-American woman suffrage movement
Art movement
In hip hop


Networked feminism
Oedipus complex
Political lesbianism

Lesbian separatism


Pro-feminism
Protofeminism
Reproductive justice
Sex workers' rights
Sexual harassment
Sexual objectification
Socialist feminism
State feminism
Straw feminism
Theory

in composition studies


Triple oppression
Victim feminism
Violence against women
Views on BDSM
Views on pornography
Views on prostitution
Views on sexual orientation
Views on sexuality
Views on transgender topics
War on Women
Women's health
Women's rights









Theory






Feminist method
Gender studies
Gender mainstreaming
Gynocentrism
Kyriarchy
Matriarchy
Women's studies
Men's studies
Patriarchy
Écriture féminine





Feminist...





anthropology
archaeology
architecture
art

art criticism
literary criticism
film theory


biology
composition studies
criminology

pathways perspective


economics
fpda
geography
international relations

constructivism


legal theory
pedagogy
philosophy

aesthetics
empiricism
epistemology
ethics

justice ethics


existentialism
metaphysics


political ecology
political theory
pornography
psychology
revisionist mythology
science fiction
sex wars
sexology
sociology
technoscience
theology

thealogy
womanist theology














By country



Albania
Australia
Bangladesh
Canada
China
Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Egypt
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Republic of Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latin America

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Haiti
Honduras
Mexico
Paraguay
Trinidad and Tobago


Lebanon
Malaysia
Mali
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Northern Cyprus
Norway
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Russia
Syria
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Vietnam
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States

Feminist movement
History of women











Lists and categories



Lists





Articles
Feminists

by nationality


Literature

American feminist literature
Feminist comic books





Conservative feminisms
Countries by women's average years in school
Ecofeminist authors
Feminist art critics
Feminist economists
Feminist philosophers
Feminist poets
Feminist rhetoricians
Jewish feminists
Muslim feminists
Feminist parties
Suffragists and suffragettes
Women's rights activists
Women's studies journals
Women's suffrage organizations




Categories




Women's rights by country
Feminists by nationality









 Feminism portal





v
t
e





Analytical feminism is a line of philosophy that applies analytic concepts and methods to feminist issues and applies feminist concepts and insights to issues that have traditionally been of interest to analytic philosophers. Like all feminists, analytical feminists insist on recognizing and contesting sexism and androcentrism.[1]



Contents


1 History
2 Philosophical approach

2.1 Doctrines
2.2 Bridge building
2.3 Reconstructing philosophy


3 References
4 External links



History[edit]
The term “analytical feminism” dates back to the early 1990s when the Society for Analytical Feminism was opened in at the University of Massachusetts Lowell.[2] It is used as an opportunity to discuss and examine issues concerning analytical feminism, in part to contrast the more prevalent influences of postmodernism and post-structuralism, and also to demonstrate that analytic philosophy is neither inherently or irredeemably male-biased. Analytic feminists have attempted to rehabilitate certain key concepts, such as truth, reason, objectivity, agency and autonomy, both because they are normatively compelling as well as in some ways liberating and empowering for women. Not limited to these concepts, analytical feminism has contributed to the historical arena of analytic philosophy such as the philosophy of language, epistemology, metaphysics and the philosophy of science.[3]
In 1995, the American philosophical magazine Hypatia published a special issue[4] clarifying the meaning of analytic feminism in the mainstream Anglo-American analytical context and in the range of feminist philosophical positions. In this issue, the authors such as Ann Cudd of the University of Kansas, Ann Garry of California State University Los Angeles, and Lynn Hankinson Nelson of the University of Washington proposed that analytic feminism typically was unrecognized and somewhat depreciated by not only analytical philosophers but academic feminist agenda as well.[5] Considered a sub-category of both analytic philosophy, and feminism, analytic feminism acknowledge the philosophical traditions of both fields while simultaneously addressing prominent issues within said fields.
Philosophical approach[edit]
Analytical feminism, as defined by Ann E. Cudd: "Analytic feminism holds that the best way to counter sexism and androcentrism is through forming a clear conception of and pursuing truth, logical consistency, objectivity, rationality, justice, and the good while recognising that these notions have often been perverted by androcentrism throughout the history of philosophy." (1996: 20) Analytic feminists engage the literature traditionally thought of as analytic philosophy, but also draw on other traditions in philosophy as well as work by feminists working in other disciplines, especially sociology and biology. They, like most analytic philosophers, value clarity and precision in argument and tend to use more rigorously structured logical and linguistic analysis in reaching their conclusions and positions as compared to other philosophical approaches.
The majority of philosophers, including feminist philosophers, have at least some formal training in analytic philosophy, with some possessing extensive education and experience regarding analyticity. There has been a conscious effort to use the word ‘analytical’, the reason being that within the field of philosophy there is sometimes an inclination to assume all feminist work as tied to other methods to philosophy, whereas upon review much of the work in feminism is closer in method to analytic conventions.[6]
According to most analytic feminists, the best method for scholars to counter sexism and androcentrism in their respective areas of inquiry is by forming a clear conception of and practicing logical consistency and neutrality.[7]
Doctrines[edit]
Even though analytical feminists retain only some traditional concepts[clarification needed], it is not doctrinaire—indeed, there is even a spirit of contrarianism within it. Nevertheless, analytic feminists share a thing that we may call a "core desire" rather than a core principle, that is to say, the need to hold on to enough of the essential normative notions of the modern European tradition to aid the kind of normativity which is necessary for both feminist political theory and philosophy. This "core desire" finds its appearance by means of the core concepts of analytical feminism.[8]
Bridge building[edit]
Analytic feminists' use of core ideas and their excerpt to the work of traditional analytic philosophers permit them to communicate with and build bridges amongst different types of scholars, for example, traditional analytic philosophers, other feminist philosophers, and, in some cases, scientists or scholars in social studies.[9]
Reconstructing philosophy[edit]
One tenet of analytic feminism holds that if philosophers positions are applicable universally, they must be usable by men and women alike, and from a range of social situations. This is a basis for what can be considered the reconstruction of philosophy via analytic feminism. This approach, which somewhat mirrors the construction of feminist philosophy tradition, attempts to limit the creation of areas or categories of philosophy that apply to only some women and feminists. It's an attempt to apply to 'all' (men and women) instead of 'some' (women and/or feminists) with specific examples of topics being feminine ethics, gynocentric ethics, or lesbian ethics. The basis for this universal approach would be an analytic feminist ethics and metaphysics which would create and establish a new criterion of adequacy for the fields of ethics and metaphysics. The goal of Miranda Fricker and Jennifer Hornsby, editors of The Cambridge Companion to Feminism in Philosophy, is to have this position included in the mainstream of the discipline (Fricker and Hornsby 2000).
Not basing the approach on any 'essential' characteristics, be they experiences or otherwise, it can maintain the importance of a variety of perspectives, while crafting a 'working' theory. 'Working' is defined as being particularly inclusive, of both men and women, but also simultaneously eliminating oppressive consequences. A wide range of experiences, interests, and background must be reflected with the theory 'working' only if it is applicable to all these issues and concerns.
There are a variety of approaches regarding the reconstruction of philosophy within analytic feminism. Some philosophers, such as Bailey (Bailey 2010) and Gary (Garry 2012), include the use of intersectionality in their approach. Miranda Fricker (2007) and Kristie Dotson (2011) make use of concept of Privilege (social inequality) in theirs, particularly with regard to epistemic ignorance and epistemic injustice. [10]
References[edit]



^ Ann E. Cudd. "One Woman's Attempt at a Definition". Archived from the original on 2012-03-24. 
^ Norco College - Riverside Community College District. "Society for Analytical Feminism". 
^ Monash University Publishing. "History of Analytical Feminism". 
^ "Hypatia-Special Issue: Analytic Feminism-August 1995". Wiley Online Library. doi:10.1111/hypa.1995.10.issue-3/issuetoc (inactive 2017-08-25). Retrieved 12 October 2012. 
^ Alessandra Allegrini. "THE NATURALISM QUESTION. HOW TO RE-THINK THE ANALYTIC – CONTINENTAL DICOTHOMY FROM A FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE". 
^ Samantha J., Brennan; Anita M., Superson (2005). Hypatia. pp. 1–9. ISSN 0887-5367. 
^ bookrags. "Analytic Feminism". 
^ Nelson, Jack; Nelson, Lynn Hankinson. Feminist Interpretations of W. V. Quine (2003 ed.). ISBN 978-0-271-02295-6. 
^ Moulton, Janice. Women, knowledge, and reality: explorations in feminist philosophy (1996 ed.). ISBN 978-0-415-90712-5. 
^ Ann, Garry,. Analytic Feminism (Spring 2011 ed.). ISBN 1-158-37777-0. 



External links[edit]

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Analytic Feminism
Analytic Feminism at Central APA June 12, 2011
Paper on Analytic Feminism
The Fordham Law School Institutional Repository -Rethinking Emotional Distress Law: Prenatal Malpractice and Feminist Theory
APA Newsletter[permanent dead link]





Categories: Feminist theorySocial theoriesAnalytic philosophyHidden categories: Pages with DOIs inactive since 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2013All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2016Articles with permanently dead external links