Evolutionary epistemology






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Evolutionary biology



Diagrammatic representation of the divergence of modern taxonomic groups from their common ancestor





Key topics


Introduction to evolution
Common descent
Evidence of common descent








Processes and outcomes



Population genetics
Variation
Diversity
Mutation
Natural selection
Adaptation
Polymorphism
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Speciation
Adaptive radiation
Co-operation
Coevolution
Divergence
Convergence
Parallel evolution
Extinction









Natural history



Origin of life
History of life
Timeline of evolution
Human evolution
Phylogeny
Biodiversity
Biogeography
Classification
Evolutionary taxonomy
Cladistics
Transitional fossil
Extinction event









History of evolutionary theory



Overview
Renaissance
Before Darwin
Darwin
Origin of Species
Before synthesis
Modern synthesis
Molecular evolution
Evo-devo
Current research
History of speciation
History of paleontology (timeline)









Fields and applications


Applications of evolution
Biosocial criminology
Ecological genetics
Evolutionary aesthetics
Evolutionary anthropology
Evolutionary computation
Evolutionary ecology
Evolutionary economics
Evolutionary epistemology
Evolutionary ethics
Evolutionary game theory
Evolutionary linguistics
Evolutionary medicine
Evolutionary neuroscience
Evolutionary physiology
Evolutionary psychology
Experimental evolution
Phylogenetics
Paleontology
Selective breeding
Speciation experiments
Sociobiology
Systematics
Universal Darwinism








Social implications


Evolution as fact and theory
Social effects
Creation–evolution controversy
Objections to evolution
Level of support








 Evolutionary biology portal
 Category
 Book
Related topics







v
t
e





Evolutionary epistemology refers to three distinct topics: (1) the biological evolution of cognitive mechanisms in animals and humans, (2) a theory that knowledge itself evolves by natural selection, and (3) the study of the historical discovery of new abstract entities such as abstract number or abstract value that necessarily precede the individual acquisition and usage of such abstractions.



Contents


1 Cognition in biological evolution
2 Growth of knowledge
3 Process of discovering new abstract entities
4 See also
5 References
6 Sources
7 External links



Cognition in biological evolution[edit]
"Evolutionary epistemology" can refer to a branch of epistemology that applies the concepts of biological evolution to the growth of animal and human cognition. It argues that the mind is in part genetically determined and that its structure and function reflect adaptation, a nonteleological process of interaction between the organism and its environment. A cognitive trait tending to increase inclusive fitness in a given population should therefore grow more common over time, and a trait tending to prevent its carriers from passing on their genes should show up less and less frequently.
Growth of knowledge[edit]
"Evolutionary epistemology" can also refer to a theory that applies the concepts of biological evolution to the growth of human knowledge, and argues that units of knowledge themselves, particularly scientific theories, evolve according to selection. In this case, a theory—like the germ theory of disease—becomes more or less credible according to changes in the body of knowledge surrounding it.
One of the hallmarks of evolutionary epistemology is the notion that empirical testing alone does not justify the pragmatic value of scientific theories, but rather that social and methodological processes select those theories with the closest "fit" to a given problem. The mere fact that a theory has survived the most rigorous empirical tests available does not, in the calculus of probability, predict its ability to survive future testing. Karl Popper used Newtonian physics as an example of a body of theories so thoroughly confirmed by testing as to be considered unassailable, but which were nevertheless overturned by Einstein's insights into the nature of space-time. For the evolutionary epistemologist, all theories are true only provisionally, regardless of the degree of empirical testing they have survived.[1]
Process of discovering new abstract entities[edit]
"Evolutionary epistemology" can also refer to the opposite of (onto)genetic epistemology, namely phylogenetic epistemology as the historical discovery and reification of abstractions that necessarily precedes the learning of such abstractions by individuals. Piaget dismissed this possibility, stating



"The fundamental hypothesis of genetic epistemology is that there is a parallelism between the progress made in the logical and rational organization of knowledge and the corresponding formative psychological processes. Well, now, if that is our hypothesis, what will be our field of study? Of course the most fruitful, most obvious field of study would be reconstituting human history: the history of human thinking in prehistoric man. Unfortunately, we are not very well informed about the psychology of Neanderthal man or about the psychology of Homo siniensis of Teilhard de Chardin. Since this field of biogenesis is not available to us, we shall do as biologists do and turn to ontogenesis. Nothing could be more accessible to study than the ontogenesis of these notions. There are children all around us." [2]



Piaget was mistaken in so quickly dismissing the study of phylogenetic epistemology, as there is much historical data available about the origins and evolution of the various notational systems that reify different kinds of abstract entity.
Popper is considered by many to have given evolutionary epistemology its first comprehensive treatment, though Donald T. Campbell coined the phrase in 1974[3] and Piaget alluded to it in 1974[4] and described the concept as one of five possible theories in The Origins of Intelligence in Children (1936).[5]
See also[edit]

Genetic epistemology
Memetics
Evolutionary psychology
Gerhard Vollmer
Konrad Lorenz, Behind the Mirror: A Search for a Natural History of Human Knowledge
Donald T. Campbell
Multiple discovery
Universal Darwinism
Peter Carruthers

References[edit]



^ Popper, 1972.[page needed]
^ Piaget, 1974.[page needed]
^ Schilpp, 1974. pp. 412–463
^ Piaget, 1974, p. 13
^ See p. 14ff



Sources[edit]

Harms, William F., Information and Meaning in Evolutionary Processes (Cambridge Studies in Philosophy and Biology) , 2004
Kress, O. A new approach to cognitive development: ontogenesis and the process of initiation. Evolution and Cognition (1993) Vol 2(4): 319-332.
Piaget, J. Genetic Epistemology. 1974
Popper, Karl R. Objective Knowledge, An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford University Press, 1972.
Riedl, R. Biology of Knowledge: The Evolutionary Basis of Reason, Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1984.
Schilpp, P. A., ed. The Philosophy of Karl R. Popper. LaSalle, IL. Open Court. 1974. See Campbell's essay, "Evolutionary Epistemology" on pp.412–463.
Toulmin, Stephen Human Understanding: Volume 1: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts, 1972.

External links[edit]

Bradie, Michael; Harms, William (2008-01-04). "Evolutionary Epistemology". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Evolutionary epistemology at PhilPapers
Evolutionary epistemology at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
Gontier, N. "Evolutionary epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Links on Evolutionary Theory and Memetics from Principia Cybernetica Web
Selection Theory Bibliography by Gary A. Cziko and Donald T. Campbell







v
t
e


Epistemology



Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Roger Gibson
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Bertrand Russell
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle





Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism





Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...





Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology








Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion












v
t
e


Philosophy of biology



Themes



Empiricism
Naturalism
Pragmatism
Reductionism

Holism










Evolution



Adaptationism
Alternatives to Darwinism

Catastrophism
Lamarckism
Orthogenesis
Mutationism
Structuralism

Spandrel


Theistic
Vitalism


Darwinism
Evolutionary epistemology
Teleology
Tree of life





Philosophers of biology



John Beatty
Lindley Darden
Daniel Dennett
John Dupré
Carla Fehr
Marjorie Grene
Peter Godfrey-Smith
James R. Griesemer
Paul E. Griffiths
David Hull
Hans Jonas
Philip Stuart Kitcher
Tim Lewens
Helen Longino
Jane Maienschein
Roberta Millstein
Sandra Mitchell
Susan Oyama
Alex Rosenberg
Michael Ruse
Sahotra Sarkar
Elliott Sober
Kim Sterelny
Alfred I. Tauber
Gerard Verschuuren
William C. Wimsatt





Biologists



Francisco J. Ayala
Patrick Bateson
Charles Darwin
Richard Dawkins
Jared Diamond
Michael Ghiselin
François Jacob
Stephen Jay Gould
Richard Lewontin
Konrad Lorenz
Humberto Maturana
Ernst Mayr
Jacques Monod
Denis Noble
Joan Roughgarden
Rolf Sattler
John Maynard Smith
Edward O. Wilson
Jonas Salk





Related



Philosophy of mind
History of biology









Authority control



GND: 4135408-4










Categories: Epistemological theoriesEvolutionInternalism and externalismHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2016Articles needing additional references from December 2016All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers